                                  Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
                          Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute

                                        Working Paper No. 325
                                  https://doi.org/10.24149/gwp325

                         Detecting Periods of Exuberance:
A Look at the Role of Aggregation with an Application to House Prices*

                                           Efthymios Pavlidis
                              Lancaster University Management School

                                       Enrique Martinez-Garcia
                                    Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas

                                           Valerie Grossman
                                    Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas

                                               August 2017

Abstract
The recently developed SADF and GSADF unit root tests of Phillips et al. (2011) and Phillips
et al. (2015) have become popular in the literature for detecting exuberance in asset prices. In
this paper, we examine through simulation experiments the effect of cross-sectional
aggregation on the power properties of these tests. The simulation design considered is based
on actual housing data for both U.S. metropolitan and international housing markets and thus
allows us to draw conclusions for different levels of aggregation. Our findings suggest that
aggregation lowers the power of both the SADF and GSADF tests. The effect, however, is
much larger for the SADF test. We also provide evidence that tests based on panel data
techniques, namely the panel GSADF test recently proposed by Pavlidis et al. (2015), can
perform substantially better than univariate tests applied to aggregated series.

JEL codes: C22, C12, G12, R30, R31

* Enrique Martinez-Garcia, Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, 2200 N. Pearl Street,
Dallas, TX 75201. 214-922-5262. enrique.martinez-garcia@dal.frb.org. We would like to thank Celso
Brunetti, Marc Joëts, María Teresa Martínez-García, and participants at the 3rd International Workshop on
"Financial Markets and Nonlinear Dynamics" for helpful discussions and suggestions. We acknowledge the
support of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas and the research assistance provided by Kelvinder Virdi. All
remaining errors are ours alone. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas or the Federal Reserve System.
1. Introduction
Mildly explosive behavior is modeled by an autoregressive process with a root that exceeds
unity but remains within the vicinity of one and approaches unity as the sample size tends to
infinity, as in Phillips and Magdalinos (2007a, 2007b) and Phillips and Magdalinos (2012). The
literature refers to instances of mildly explosive behavior as periods of exuberance, a
terminology which we henceforth also adopt in the paper.

Mildly explosive behavior represents a small departure from martingale behavior, but it is
consistent with the submartingale (explosive) property commonly used to define rational
bubbles in the asset pricing literature. Diba and Grossman (1988a; 1988b) were among the first
to argue within the standard asset pricing equation framework that, given a constant discount
factor, the detection of such a departure in the data can be seen as evidence of non-
fundamental (bubble-like) behavior.

Diba and Grossman (1988a; 1988b) are also among the seminal papers to propose the use of
unit root and cointegration tests for detecting mildly explosive behavior. However, it is a well-
known fact that standard unit root tests have extremely low power in detecting episodes of
explosive behavior in asset prices that end with a large drop. As has been shown by a number
of studies, this type of nonlinear dynamics, which are consistent with the presence of
periodically-collapsing bubbles in asset markets, can frequently lead to finding spurious
stationarity even though the underlying asset price process is inherently explosive (Evans, 1991;
Gurkaynak, 2008).

To alleviate this problem, researchers have recently proposed recursive (right-tailed) unit root
tests which, by utilizing subsamples of data, perform remarkably better in identifying periods of
explosiveness (Homm and Breitung, 2012). These recursive unit root tests--namely the
supremum ADF (SADF) and the Generalized SADF (GSADF)­have been widely employed for
testing for speculative dynamics in asset prices over the last decade (Phillips and Yu (2011);
Phillips et al., 2015). Perhaps their most popular application is in real estate markets.1 Following

1 Conventional testing methods for detecting evidence consistent with the presence of rational bubbles in the time
series include unit root and cointegration tests (Diba and Grossman, 1988a; 1988b), variance bound tests (LeRoy

                                                          1
the housing boom of the early and mid-2000s and its subsequent market collapse leading to the
2008 global recession, there has been a plethora of studies that test for explosive dynamics in
real estate prices (e.g., Phillips and Yu, 2011; Pavlidis et al. 2015; Engsted et al. 2016; Yusupova
et al. 2016).

A common feature of all the above studies is that they employ house prices indices which are
constructed by aggregating data across locations. A question of direct practical relevance to
applied researchers is: what is the effect of the level of cross-sectional aggregation on the
performance of recursive unit root tests? This question is particularly relevant for housing since
there is substantial heterogeneity in the growth of housing prices across local/regional markets
(e.g., house prices in San Francisco behave very differently than prices in Denver or Washington)
and, even within the same market, there is great variation across locations so that aggregate and
disaggregate series may behave very differently (see, e.g., Gyourko et al. 2006).2

Although potentially important, the effect of cross-sectional aggregation on the power of unit
root tests remains unexplored and often overlooked. The existing econometric literature has
mainly focused on the role of temporal aggregation and sample frequency on the performance
of standard unit root tests. For instance, Shiller and Perron (1985), Perron (1991), and Campbell
and Perron (1991) find through Monte Carlo simulations that the power of unit root tests is
mainly affected by the time span, and much less by sampling frequency. In line with this finding,
Pierse and Snell (1995) show theoretically that the asymptotic local power of a unit root test is
not dependent on sample frequency. However, Boswijk and Klaassen (2012) demonstrate that
this result does not hold for time series that exhibit fat tails and volatility clustering. With regard
to temporal aggregation, Choi (1992) illustrates that in finite samples aggregating subinterval
data can also result in substantial power losses.

and Porter, 1981; Shiller, 1981), specification tests (West, 1987), and Chow and CUSUM-type tests (Homm and
Breitung, 2012).
2During the second half of the 20th century, house prices in the ten U.S. metropolitan areas with the highest growth
rates (adjusted for inflation) increased by 2.2 to 3.5 percent. The increase in housing prices in the ten metropolitan
areas with the lowest rates was more than three times smaller, between 0.5 and 1.1 percent.

                                                          2
In this paper, we examine the role of cross-sectional aggregation by conducting two large
simulation experiments based on actual real house price data. The first experiment uses monthly
real house price data from the S&P/Case-Shiller 10-City Composite Index for the 10 largest
metropolitan areas in the U.S., deflated by their corresponding local CPI. The second experiment
utilizes national-level, quarterly real house price index data for 23 mostly-advanced economies,
deflated with the corresponding country's PCE deflator, obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank
of Dallas' international house price database (Mack and Martínez-García, 2011).

The main conclusion that emerges from our two simulation exercises is that aggregation lowers
the power of both the SADF test of Phillips et al. (2011) and the GSADF test of Phillips et al. (2015).
The decline is substantially larger for the SADF test than for the GSADF test, which provides an
important reason to prefer the latter for detecting periods of exuberance in asset prices--
particularly whenever researchers have to rely on highly aggregated data. We also provide
evidence that the panel GSADF recently proposed by Pavlidis et al. (2015) is preferable whenever
disaggregated data is available.

The structure of the remainder of the paper is as follows: Section 2 outlines the SADF test of
Phillips and Yu (2011), the GSADF test of Phillips et al. (2015), and the panel GSADF test of Pavlidis
et al. (2015). This section also discusses the potential role of aggregation on the power of the
recursive (right-tailed) unit root tests. Section 3 defines our Monte Carlo simulation design, and
presents results for the actual and the simulated data. Section 4 argues about the implications of
our simulation analysis on the role of aggregation and about the practical implementation of
these novel tests for monitoring the dynamics of asset prices. Section 5 concludes.

2. Tests of Mildly Explosive Behavior
Phillips and Magdalinos (2007a, 2007b) define a mildly explosive root using the following data-
generating process (DGP) for the observed time series:

 =   +  ,  ~. . . (0,  ),  (1)

3
with the intercept set at zero for simplicity, where  = 1 + ,   (0,1) and  denotes the
sample size. Whenever  > 0, such a root is explosive and approaches unity at a rate slower
than ( ) as   .3 Subtracting  from both sides, the process in (1) can be expressed
as  =   +  ,  ~. . . (0,  ) where  is the difference operator, and  =  - 1 is
the corresponding coefficient to be tested.

If serial correlation is a concern, a standard parametric autoregressive approach to deal with it
consists in extending equation (1) to an AR(k+1) process (Said and Dickey, 1984). The approach
is based on generalizing the process to be  () =  , where  () = 1 -   -  -
  -   defines the lag operator. A unit root in  () corresponds to  (1) =
0. Then, testing for a unit root is more easily performed by rewriting the augmented regression
model in the following form:4

 =   +    +  ,  ~. . . (0,  ),                                                                   (2)

where  = - (1) and  = -( +  +  +  +  ),  = -( +  +  +
 ), ... ,  = -( ).

The procedure studied in the paper for detecting mildly explosive behavior consists in
recursively applying the Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test for the null of a unit root against
the alternative of a mildly explosive root (the right tail of the distribution) based on the
specification in (2):

First, our statistical toolkit for the detection of periods of mildly explosive behavior includes:
the supremum ADF (SADF) of Phillips et al. (2011) and the generalized SADF (GSADF) of Phillips

3 Phillips and Magdalinos (2007a, 2007b) and Phillips and Magdalinos (2012) provide a large-sample asymptotic
theory for this class of mildly explosive processes that enables econometric inference, unlike what occurs for
purely explosive processes. Autoregressive processes with a purely explosive root,  =  +  ,
 ~(0,  ), || > 1, were first discussed by White (1958) and Anderson (1959). Assuming a zero initial
condition for  , an asymptotic Cauchy limit distribution theory for the OLS/ML estimator exists. However, the
asymptotic distribution of the estimator is ultimately dependent on the distributional assumptions imposed on the
innovations (Anderson, 1959)--the imposed Gaussianity of the errors cannot be relaxed without changing the
asymptotic distribution. Hence, there is no general framework for asymptotic inference on purely explosive
processes.
4 The ADF approach generalizes the Dickey and Fuller (1979) test by parametrically removing the structural
autocorrelation in the time series, but otherwise implements the same testing procedure.

                                                          4
et al. (2015), together with the novel panel GSADF test of Pavlidis et al. (2015). The GSADF test
was designed to overcome the SADF's lack of power in identifying multiple episodes of
periodically-collapsing mildly explosive behavior within sample. Whenever disaggregated data
is available, the panel GSADF test offers a more flexible and powerful alternative than the
univariate GSADF test. This is because the panel GSADF test explicitly models the cross-
sectional dependencies and heterogeneity present in the constituent series that are otherwise
muddled together in the aggregated series. However, whenever disaggregated data is not
available, we find that the GDSAF test tends to outperform the SADF test in terms of power
thanks to the more flexible `recursive' specification used in the implementation of the ADF
regression equation (which we dissect further in the remainder of this section).

Second, some notation is required to describe the recursive implementation of the SADF and
GSADF tests. We can think of the full sample as being normalized on the interval [0,1] (i.e.,
divided by the total number of observations ). We denote  and  as the corresponding
fractions of the sample which define the beginning and end of a given subsample such that
0   <   1. We denote by  =  -  the window size of the regression estimation,
while  is the fixed initial window required by the econometrician such that the subsample
ending in  satisfies that   [ , 1] (i.e.,  is the minimum window size required by the
econometrician).

Finally, the empirical specification used for testing is the following recursive formulation of the
ADF auxiliary regression equation:

 =  , +  ,  +   ,  +  ,  ~. . . 0,  , ,                                                        (3)

where  denotes the generic time series tested for explosiveness,  for  = 1, ... ,  are the
differenced lags of the time series, and  is an i.i.d. error term. Furthermore,  is the maximum
number of lags included in the specification, while  , ,  , , and  , for  = 1, ... ,  are
the corresponding regression coefficients--the intercept, the autoregressive coefficient, and
the coefficients of the lagged first differences--when estimated over the (normalized)
subsample beginning in  and ending in  .

5
2.1 Standard Right-Tailed Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) Test

Setting  = 0 and  =  = 1 yields the standard ADF test statistic over the full sample,

 =         ,     . Under the I(1) null, the limit distribution of                        ()  ()

           .. ,                                                     is given by                 ,

                                                                     ()

where  is a demeaned Wiener process (Brownian motion). With this, we test the null
hypothesis of a unit root in  ,  :  , = 0, against the alternative of mildly explosive behavior,
 :  , > 0. Whenever  exceeds the corresponding right-tailed critical value from its limit
distribution, the unit root hypothesis is rejected in favor of the alternative of mildly explosive

behavior.

Evans (1991) shows through simulation methods that non-recursive unit root tests like 
(and cointegration tests as well) have low power and frequently cannot reject the null of no
explosive behavior even when present in the data. Nonlinear dynamics, such as those displayed
by mildly explosive processes, may lead the standard right-tailed ADF test to findings of
spurious stationarity. Intuitively, this is the case because increases followed by downward
corrections make the process appear mean-reverting and stationary in finite samples even
when it is inherently not.

2.2 Sup ADF (SADF) Test
In order to deal with the effect of a collapse occurring within sample on the performance of the
standard right-tailed ADF test ( ), Phillips et al. (2011) proposes a recursive procedure
based on the recursive estimation of the ADF regression equation in (3) on subsamples of the
data. The approach uses a forward expanding estimation subsample with the end of the
subsample  increasing from   (0,1) (the fixed minimum size for the initial window) to one
(the last available observation). The starting point of each estimation is kept fixed at  = 0, so
the expanding window size of the regression (over the normalized sample) is simply given by
 =  . Then, incrementing the window size   [ , 1] with one additional observation at a

                 6
time, the recursive estimation of the ADF regression equation in (3) over the forward expanding
subsample yields a sequence of  = , statistics.

                                                                          .. ,

The Phillips et al. (2011) test statistic, called sup ADF (SADF), is defined as the supremum value
of the sequence of  statistics expressed as follows:

             ( ) = [ , ]  .                                                                     (4)

Under the I(1) null, the limit distribution of the ( ) statistic is given by

             () ()
[ , ]
                      . Whenever ( ) exceeds the corresponding right-tailed critical value

 ()

from its limit distribution, the unit root hypothesis is rejected in favor of mildly explosive

behavior.

The rolling-window structure of the ( ) test leads to improved power in detecting mildly
explosive behavior relative to what can be achieved with the standard  test alone.
Furthermore, Homm and Breitung (2012) show through simulation experiments that the
( ) test generally outperforms alternative testing methods commonly used to detect a
single structural break in the persistence of the process from I(1) to explosive as well.

The alternative tests considered by Homm and Breitung (2012) aim to detect a permanent
structural break in the persistence of the process and, as a consequence, perform well only
when the series becomes explosive but never bursts in-sample. Intuitively, the ( ) test
performs better than those alternatives because it deals with series where at most one episode
of explosiveness occurs and collapses in-sample. However, the ( ) test power and its
performance deteriorate in the presence of recurring (more than one) and periodically-
collapsing episodes of exuberance, as established in Phillips et al. (2015).

             7
2.3 Generalized SADF (GSADF) Test
Phillips et al. (2015) proposed another recursive (right-tailed) unit root test, the Generalized
SADF (GSADF), covering a larger number of subsamples than the ( ) test by relaxing the
requirement that the starting point of the subsample  be kept fixed. This additional margin of
flexibility on the estimation window of the ( ) results in substantial power gains,
consistent with multiple and periodically-collapsing episodes of explosiveness in the data (while
the ( ) test is only consistent with a single such episode in-sample).

The GSADF approach builds on the forward expanding estimation subsample strategy of the
SADF procedure, but instead allows the starting point of the subsample  to change. The initial
window size  satisfies that  <  , while the expanding window size of the regression (over
the normalized sample) is defined as  =  -  . Incrementing the window size   [ , 1]
with one additional observation at a time over each starting point of the sample  
[0,  -  ], the recursive estimation of the ADF regression equation in (3) yields a sequence of
 = , statistics.

                  .. ,

The Phillips et al. (2015) test statistic, called Generalized SADF (GSADF), is defined as the
supremum value of the sequence of  statistics expressed as follows:

                  ( ) = [ , ] [ , ]  .                                                            (5)

Under the I(1) null, the limit distribution of the ( ) statistic is given by

                  () ()   ( ) [ ( ) ( )]
                                                     . Whenever ( )
[ ,    ], [ , ]               

                   ()     ()  

exceeds the corresponding right-tailed critical value from its limit distribution, the unit root

hypothesis is rejected in favor of mildly explosive behavior. The rolling-window structure of the

( ) test leads to improved power in detecting recurring episodes of mildly explosive

behavior relative to what can be achieved with the standard  test and with the ( )

test.

                         8
2.4 Panel GSADF Test
Pavlidis et al. (2015) developed an extension of the GSADF test procedure for heterogeneous
panels based on the panel data techniques developed by Im et al. (2003). Consider the panel
version of the ADF regression equation in (3):

 =  , +  ,   +    ,    +  ,  ~. . . 0,  , ,                                                  (6)
                  ,

where  = 1, ... ,  indexes the  constituent time series to be tested { } , and the
aggregated series  is a linear combination of those disaggregated series. The procedure then
tests the null hypothesis of a unit root in all  disaggregated series { } ,  :  , = 0, ,
against the alternative of mildly explosive behavior,  :  , > 0 for at least one .

Let  , = , denote the test statistic for a given series  over the subsample

                           .. ,

beginning in  and ending in  . Over the sequence of  , for all possible  and  , we
define the Backward SADF (BSADF) as  ( ) = [ , ] [ , ]  , . The panel
BSADF statistic can now be defined by taking the average at each time period of the BSADF
statistics of each constituent series  as follows:   ( ) =   ( ).
Then, the definition of the panel GSADF test statistic follows naturally as the supremum of the
panel BSADF, i.e.,

 ( ) = [ , ]   ( ) .                                                                         (7)

The distribution of panel unit root tests based on mean unit root statistics is not invariant to
cross-sectional dependence of the error terms. To deal with that, the procedure of Pavlidis et
al. (2015) adopts a sieve bootstrap approach that is designed specifically to allow for cross-
sectional error dependence. If the panel GSADF statistic is larger than the corresponding critical
value, we reject the null hypothesis of a unit root in favor of a mildly explosive process.

The specification of the alternative hypothesis proposed by Pavlidis et al. (2015) allows for the
coefficients  , to vary across each of the constituent time series and, in that sense, is a more
flexible alternative for testing than the homogenous alternative hypothesis. Hence, the test

                                                          9
specification better captures cases in which the aggregated data inherits its explosiveness from
some (but not all) of its constituent series. Furthermore, while the univariate GSADF test on
aggregated data imposes a linear restriction on the  and  hypothesis being tested, the
panel GSADF approach tests the null that all constituent series are I(1) directly against the
alternative that at least one displays mildly explosive behavior.5 Not surprisingly due to the
additional flexibility of the framework that incorporates all relevant cross-sectional information
for testing (not just the time series information), we find that such a panel statistic when data is
available to implement it performs better in terms of power than a simple univariate GSADF
test on the series that aggregates all constituent series.

2.5 Power Loss Due to Aggregation
Time series that display boom-bust episodes, like real house prices, display two important
properties: First, they are nonlinear (because they burst) and, second, they are explosive during
their boom phase. The reader is referred to Blanchard and Watson (1982), Diba and Grossman
(1988a; 1988b), and Evans (1991) for theoretical DGPs consistent with the fundamental asset
pricing equation that display such nonlinear and explosive dynamics (in the presence of rational
bubbles).

Regarding the first property, the effects of aggregating nonlinear processes (or linear with
nonlinear processes) are, in general, unknown, as discussed in Granger and Lee (1999). This

5 As an illustration of the specification of the panel and univariate GSADF testing hypothesis, consider a simple
arithmetic mean aggregator where the  disaggregated series are { } . Therefore, the aggregated series is
given by  =   . The null hypothesis of a unit root in  for any subsample can be expressed as  :  , =

    , = 0, while the null hypothesis of a unit root in all disaggregated series { } imposes the stricter
requirement that  :  , = 0, . In turn, the alternative of mildly explosive behavior in  for any subsample is
expressed as  :  , =   , > 0, while the alternative hypothesis tested on disaggregated data { }
simply requires that  :  , > 0 for some (but not necessarily all) of the constituent series . If we reject the null
with the panel GSADF test when it is false, then it must be the case that  , =   , > 0 is true and
accordingly we should reject the null with the univariate GSADF test on aggregated data as well. However, in
comparing the two univariate and panel GSADF tests, we often find that the ability or power of the panel test to
detect mildly explosive behavior if such behavior truly occurs in the sample (rejecting the null when it is incorrect)
tends to be higher than that of the univariate GSADF test.

                                                         10
implies that, even if we knew the true DGP for each individual constituent series, we may still
not be able to infer the exact DGP for the aggregate index constructed from those constituent
series.

We can, nevertheless, draw inferences about the integration properties of an aggregated series
by exploiting the second property of periodically-collapsing episodes of exuberance (i.e., of
mildly explosive dynamics). It is well known that the combination of explosive processes with
other explosive, unit root, and/or stationary processes results in an explosive process.6 This
point is particularly important for unit root testing procedures because it implies that as long as
one of the constituent series--any one of the constituent real house price indices in our
illustrations, for example--is explosive, so will be the aggregate series.

However, we argue that aggregation affects the performance of the (right-tailed) unit root tests
to detect mildly explosive behavior. We often find that the empirical evidence to detect
explosiveness is a lot stronger if we can test it directly on the affected constituent series than if
one has to make inferences on the basis of an observed aggregate series that mixes it with
other constituent series that do not display similar patterns of explosiveness.

We evaluate the performance of the (right-tailed) unit root tests discussed in this section on the
basis of their statistical power. The power of a test is defined by the probability with which the
test correctly rejects the null hypothesis ( ) when the alternative hypothesis ( ) is true--in
our case, that determines the ability of the test to detect deviations from unit root behavior
whenever the data actually displays mildly explosive behavior. As the power of the test
increases, the probability of a Type II error (a false negative) declines under the alternative
hypothesis.

Along this metric, our simulation findings reveal that the power of the (right-tailed) unit root
ADF test improves when we exploit the recursive nature of the SADF specification of Phillips

6 In theory, the combination of explosive processes can be stationary or I(1) if the processes under consideration
are co-explosive (see, e.g., Nielsen, 2010). Therefore, the effect of an upward explosive period in one of the
constituent series could offset the effect of a simultaneous downward explosive period in another constituent
series of the aggregate. Although theoretically possible, this scenario seems unlikely from a practical point of view
in most conventional applications (a knife-edge case).

                                                         11
and Yu (2011) and especially that of the GSADF specification of Phillips et al. (2015). Simply put,
the power loss due to aggregation worsens the already low power problem of the standard
(right-tailed) unit root test. The recursive nature of the SADF and GSADF tests improves the
power and, accordingly, gives these tests a better chance at detecting exuberance in the
aggregate series. The panel GSADF test applied to disaggregated data introduces a much richer
specification that captures the heterogeneity and cross-sectional dependencies of the
constituent series and further improves the power of the GSADF approach.7

To understand this, we recognize that the statistical power of the (right-tailed) unit root ADF
test depends on a number of factors.8 First, we note that the recursive implementation of the
SADF test and, particularly, the generalized recursive implementation of the GSADF test keep
the full sample size invariant but lead to higher power. The recursive SADF and GSADF
procedures lift the restriction of testing over the full sample and instead define their statistics in
terms of the supremum of an ADF statistic sequence over many subsamples (including the full
sample itself). Intuitively, the probability of rejecting the null when it is false (the power) should
not be lower with the SADF/GSADF tests than the power of the (right-tailed) ADF test over the
full sample as the performance of the (right-tailed) ADF test can always be achieved within the
given sequence.

Second, the magnitude of the deviation from unit root to mildly explosive behavior present in
some of the disaggregated series data can become diluted due to aggregation. In turn, the
smaller effect on the aggregate series lowers the power for any of the non-recursive and
recursive (right-tailed) unit root ADF tests studied in the paper. In order to illustrate this point,
consider a simple arithmetic mean aggregator where the  disaggregated series are { } .

7 However, the practical implementation of panel testing is not always possible when aggregates exist but we lack
the actual disaggregated data.
8 The statistical significance is defined in terms of the probability of a Type I error ()--which is the probability of
rejecting the null when the null is correct. Naturally, another factor that influences the power of a test is its
statistical significance which is customarily set at  = 5%. However, while increasing  lowers the probability of a
Type II error () and therefore increases the power of the test, it also means accepting a higher risk of rejecting the
null when the null is true (Type I error).

                                                         12
Therefore, the aggregated series is given by  =   . Assume the following simple DGP
for the constituent series (with only one of them displaying mildly explosive behavior):

 =  ,  = 1, ... ,  - 1,                                                         (8)

                                               =  +  ,

where  ~. . . (0,  , ) for all  = 1, ... ,  with possibly cross-sectional dependence in the
error terms, and where  =  - 1 is the coefficient to be tested. Hence, in this illustration, we
see that the dynamics for the aggregate series can be expressed as:

 =         +  ,                                                                 (9)

where  =   is the average error (whose distribution depends on the assumptions
imposed on the errors for each series ).

With this example we show that the aggregated series inherits the mildly explosive behavior of
the constituent series  = , but we also see that the magnitude of the deviation from unit
root behavior can get diluted in the aggregated series. In this case, we observe that the relative
contribution of the constituent series  =  which displays mildly explosive behavior to the
aggregate series weighs down the magnitude of the effect given by the coefficient . Intuitively,
the smaller effect incorporated into the aggregate series can lead to lower statistical power in
finite samples.

In this sense, we could achieve better performance by testing for mildly explosive behavior
directly on the disaggregated series  =  or over the entire cross-section (along the lines of
the panel GSADF of Pavlidis et al., 2015) than testing for it indirectly through the aggregated
series. Needless to say, this is not an option when the disaggregated series are not available for
testing. Hence, it remains an empirical question to quantify the extent of the power loss due to
aggregation and the mitigation effects that can be obtained with the recursive SADF and GSADF
procedures. The two simulation exercises applied to real house price data that we discuss in the
remainder of the paper aim to answer formally those questions.

      13
3. Simulation Experiments
The empirical question of interest for the detection of periods of exuberance is: what is the
effect of aggregation on the power of the SADF and GSADF tests in finite samples? To shed light
on this issue, our Monte Carlo simulation procedure under the assumption of normality of the
errors consists of the following steps:

Step 1a. Fit sequentially to the corresponding real house price index the Augmented Dickey-
Fuller (ADF) regression equation:

 =  , +  ,  +   ,  +  ,  ~. . . 0,  , ,  (10)

where  and  denote fractions of the total sample size that specify the starting and
ending points of a subsample and satisfy the rule proposed by Phillips et al. (2015),  -
  0.01 + 1.8/, and  is the maximum number of lags. Obtain, for each time period t,
the vector of estimated coefficients ( , ,  , ,  , ,  = 1, ... , ) and the estimated
variance of residuals ( , ) that correspond to the BSADF statistic. For further details on
the BSADF, SADF, and GSADF statistics, see Phillips et al. (2015) and Pavlidis et al. (2015).

Step 1b. Use the matrix of estimated coefficients and draw randomly from a normal
distribution with mean zero and variance equal to the estimated error variance at each time
period  to generate artificial series from:

 =  , +  ,  +   ,  +  ,  ~ 0,  , .       (11)

Note that, due to its sequential nature and the flexible window size, this procedure allows
for very rich dynamics in the simulated constituent series that closely resemble the
dynamics of the actual prices.

14
    Step 2. Run the SADF, GSADF, and Panel GSADF tests on the artificial constituent series and
    obtain the corresponding test statistics.

    Step 3. Run the SADF and GSADF tests on the aggregate series (for simplicity, the aggregate
    is set equal to the average of the constituent simulated series) and obtain the
    corresponding test statistics.

    Step 4. Repeat steps (1b) to (3) a thousand times, and compute the power of each test as
    the number of times the value of the test statistic is greater than the 95% critical value.

Technical Details: The computation of the SADF, GSADF, and panel GSADF test statistics
requires the selection of the minimum window size  and the maximum autoregressive lag
length . Regarding the minimum window size, we follow the rule of thumb of Phillips et al.
(2015),  = 0.01 + . where  is the total number of observations. With respect to the

                                   

autoregressive lag length , we evaluate our results for the case where  is equal to 4. Our
findings do not appear very sensitive to the lag length specification.
The implementation of the univariate test procedures also requires the limit distributions of the
SADF, GSADF, and panel GSADF test statistics. These distributions are non-standard and depend
on the minimum window size  . For the former two tests, finite-sample critical values are
obtained through Monte Carlo simulations by generating 2000 replications of a driftless
random walk process with (0,1) errors. For the panel test, we set the number of bootstrap
replications to 1000.

                                                         15
3.1 Aggregation from Local to National Real House Prices
Our first Monte Carlo simulation exercise focuses on the U.S. housing market and its major
metropolitan statistical areas. For the exercise, we use data on monthly house prices for the
S&P/Case-Shiller 10-City Composite Home Price Index and its constituents, deflated by its
corresponding local CPI. The sample covers the period from January 1987 to February 2016,
giving a total of 350 observations. The data sources are S&P Dow Jones Indices and the Bureau
of Labor Statistics.

Table 1 reports the SADF and GSADF statistics for the actual S&P/Case-Shiller 10-City Composite
Home Price Index and its constituents, as well as finite-sample critical values. According to the
results, the null hypothesis of a unit root can be rejected at the 5% significance level for all
metropolitan areas except for Los Angeles, for which the SADF statistic does not exceed its
critical value. Thus, all series but one appear to exhibit exuberance during (at least) part of the
sample period under consideration. Using the GSADF test, all series appear to display evidence
of exuberance at the 1% significance level. Moreover, we observe that the estimated test
statistics for the aggregated series fall inside the range of values for the constituent series.

In accordance with the results for the actual series, the simulation results reported in Chart 1
show that the power of the SADF and GSADF tests for the aggregate series lies between the
lowest and highest power for the constituent series. This result implies that aggregation leads
to power losses, since if there was no power loss then every time a test detected explosive
dynamics in a constituent, it would also detect explosive dynamics in the aggregate. A striking
contrast comes from looking at Boston for which the power of the SADF is 97 percent or Miami
for which the power is 96 percent, while the power for the 10-city aggregate that includes them
is merely 16 percent with the SADF test. By comparing the results for the two tests, the SADF
and the GSADF tests, we observe that the GSADF test performs remarkably better than the
SADF with very small power losses due to aggregation. In this application, the power achieved is
somewhat lower but very close to that of the Panel GSADF test based on the disaggregated
data.

                                                         16
Table 1. S&P/Case-Shiller 10-City Composite Home Price Index, Unit Root Test Results (Actual Data)

Panel A: Test Statistics      SADF                                GSADF         Panel GSADF

Boston                        2.264***                            5.253***

Chicago                       2.719***                            4.946***

Denver                        1.748**                             7.372***

Las Vegas                     4.791**                             5.321***

Los Angeles                   1.098                               3.803***

Miami                         4.703***                            5.987***

Washington                    1.793**                             4.329***

New York                      1.520**                             4.742***

San Diego                     1.959***                            3.740***

San Francisco                 2.493***                            3.947***

U.S. Composite 10             2.417***                            4.026***

Full Panel of 10 Cities                                                         3.295***

Panel B: Critical Values      SADF                                GSADF         Panel GSADF

90%                           1.145                               1.911         1.800

95%                           1.433                               2.167         2.025

99%                           1.942                               2.712         2.431

Notes: *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent significance levels

respectively. All results are for autoregressive lag length k=4.

Sources: Standard & Poor's, Bureau of Labor Statistics, authors' calculations.

                          17
                                          Chart 1. S&P/Case-Shiller 10-City Composite Home Price Index,
                                                                      Simulation Results

                              1.00

                              0.80

simulated power of the tests  0.60

                              0.40

                              0.20

                              0.00                                          Miami  DC New York S. Diego SF               Aggr.  Panel
                                        Boston Chicago Denver Las Vegas LA   0.96                                        0.15   1.00
                                                                             0.98                                        0.99
                              SADF 0.97   0.69  0.61  0.89  0.10                   0.48  0.54  0.41  0.49

                              GSADF 1.00  0.96  0.92  0.97  0.97                   0.97  0.95  0.99  0.92

Notes: The figure and table display the power of the SADF and GSADF tests. The nominal significance level is set at 5%.
Sources: Standard & Poor's, Bureau of Labor Statistics, authors' calculations.

3.2 Aggregation from National to International Real House Prices
To provide further evidence on the effect of aggregation on the performance of both sequential
unit root tests, in our second experiment, we repeat the same Monte Carlo simulation exercise
using the cross-country real house price data from the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas (Mack
and Martínez-García, 2011). The database comes at quarterly frequency and covers 23
countries between the first quarter of 1975 and the fourth quarter of 2015, deflated with the
corresponding country PCE deflator.9 Table 2 reports the SADF and GSADF statistics for the
actual aggregate real house price index and its constituent country indices, as well as the
corresponding finite-sample critical values; and Chart 2 displays the simulation results. This

9 The national house price indices are those most consistent with the quarterly U.S. house price index for existing
single-family houses produced by the Federal Housing Finance Agency. All data can be accessed publicly at:
http://www.dallasfed.org/institute/houseprice/

                                                         18
second set of results shows even more clearly than in the previous exercise the severe power
loss of the SADF test due to aggregation, and the superior performance of the GSADF test over
the SADF. However, it also points out that power losses relative to the panel GSADF test can be
non-negligible even when using the more robust GSADF test.

             Table 2. Dallas Fed's Real House Prices, Unit Root Test Results (Actual Data)

Panel A: Test Statistics    SADF      GSADF     Panel GSADF

Australia                   2.296***  6.110***

Belgium                     0.904     3.450***

Canada                      0.699     4.061***

Switzerland                 1.848**   4.091***

Germany                     -0.595    3.515***

Denmark                     1.279*    3.186***

Spain                       0.885     2.408**

Finland                     1.255*    2.357**

France                      1.065     2.055*

U.K.                        1.629**   3.143***

Ireland                     2.793***  6.781***

Italy                       -1.369    2.800***

Japan                       1.621**   5.013***

S. Korea                    -0.541    -0.130

Luxembourg                  2.383***  5.278***

Netherlands                 -1.140    4.064***

Norway                      1.518**   2.533**

New Zealand                 1.911**   3.051***

Sweden                      1.125*    5.178***

U.S.                        1.686**   4.243***

S. Africa                   -0.474    3.807***

Croatia                     -0.002    2.244**

Israel                      0.936     1.849*

Aggregate                   -0.242    2.910***

Full Panel of 22 Countries                      1.641***

Panel B: Critical Values    SADF      GSADF     Panel GSADF

90%                         1.076     1.766     0.678

95%                         1.380     2.065     0.749

99%                         1.936     2.670     0.942

Notes: *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent significance levels
respectively. All results are for autoregressive lag length k=4.

Sources: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas' International House Price Database and authors' calculations.

                            19
                                                       Chart 2. Dallas Fed's Real House Price Series,
                                                                       Simulation Results

                              1.00

                              0.80

simulated power of the tests  0.60

                              0.40

                              0.20

                              0.00                                                                                                                      Aggr.  Panel
                                        AU BE CA CH DE DK ES FI FR GB IE IT JP KR LU NL NO NZ SE US ZA HR IL                                            0.47   0.99
                                                                                                                                                        0.84
                              SADF 0.57 0.33 0.12 0.28 0.02 0.20 0.26 0.20 0.31 0.51 0.94 0.01 0.23 0.02 0.69 0.01 0.59 0.43 0.48 0.39 0.31 0.03 0.12
                              GSADF 0.84 0.94 0.76 0.77 0.49 0.62 0.86 0.82 0.86 0.84 0.97 0.48 0.97 0.20 0.98 0.97 0.79 0.72 0.90 0.95 0.85 0.26 0.42

Notes: The figure and table display the power of the univariate SADF and GSADF tests and the panel GSADF. The stat. significance level is set at 5%.
Sources: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas' International House Price Database and authors' calculations.

4. Implications for Detecting Explosiveness
The empirical contribution of our paper is to examine the effect of cross-sectional aggregation
on the performance of recursive (right-tailed) unit root tests--the SADF and GSADF tests,
developed by Phillips and Yu (2011) and Phillips et al. (2015) respectively. Without loss of
generality, we do so using available real house price data that is reported at different levels of
aggregation across locations. We specifically investigate aggregation of local real house prices
to national prices and aggregation of national real prices to international real prices. To the best
of our knowledge, the role that aggregation plays on detecting periods of mildly explosive
behavior in time series has not been examined in the literature. Furthermore, we explore the
panel GSADF test proposed by Pavlidis et al. (2015) to exploit the cross-sectional variation in
disaggregated data and to provide a benchmark to quantify the power loss associated with
aggregation.

                                                         20
It is appropriate to note here that our findings are generally valid to applications based on any
asset price index (or, for that matter, any time series) where the issue of aggregation may be
pertinent in testing the occurrence of episodes of mildly explosive behavior. Given the wide use
of aggregated indices, the issue of aggregation is a very important topic in financial
econometrics with applications to the monitoring of asset markets (not just housing markets).
The application to housing market data is particularly relevant for illustration purposes because
housing is notoriously heterogeneous across many characteristics (including their location). It is
also an interesting application in itself because of the significance of the housing cycle on broad
real economic activity--the widespread boom-bust housing cycle that preceded the 2008-09
global recession being a prime example of that.

Asset prices in general, and real house prices in particular, are most likely characterized by a
nonlinear DGP, displaying I(1) dynamics in some periods and explosive dynamics in others.
Under such a scenario, the standard full-sample ADF model coefficient estimates are biased due
to model-misspecification, and simulations based on those coefficients cannot replicate the
behavior of actual house prices. However, the regression specification that we focus on is not
the full-sample ADF but the more flexible recursive ADF regression specifications proposed by
Phillips and Yu (2011) and Phillips et al. (2015).

The beta estimates in the recursive ADF regression change over time, taking values in the
stationary, I(1), and mildly explosive regions--these changes, in turn, can be detected to
conventional significance levels with the SADF and GSADF tests proposed by the same authors.
It is in this sense that this recursive ADF regressions are more flexible than the full-sample ADF
regression, allowing our simulation exercise to better replicate very rich dynamics such as the
ones displayed by real house prices.

Our empirical investigation is then based on two real house price datasets that showcase at
least two levels of aggregation across heterogeneous locations. First, we look at the
construction of national house price indices that aggregate price data across a number of
heterogeneous major statistical metropolitan areas of the U.S. Second, we also look at the
construction of international real house price indices aggregating representative national

                                                         21
indices. Our analysis of the disaggregated housing data suggests that there is very strong
evidence of exuberance within sample in both datasets. We find that by exploiting
disaggregated data, we can more successfully detect the occurrence of such episodes of
exuberance.

More specifically, our findings reveal a decline in power of both the SADF and GSADF due to
aggregation and very large differences in the performance of the two tests when applied to
aggregated data. We argue that this may warrant increased utilization not only of
disaggregated data but also of panel data techniques, such as the panel GSADF proposed by
Pavlidis et al. (2015), whenever possible. Our findings also indicate that the GSADF test applied
to aggregated data is substantially more powerful than the SADF test. Thus, we conclude that
the GSADF test should be preferred to the SADF whenever the researcher is restricted to using
aggregated data for detecting explosive behavior in time series.

5. Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we explore the relevance of aggregation for detecting periods of exuberance
(mildly explosive) with two applications based on real house price data disaggregated by
location. We find that by exploiting disaggregated data, we can more successfully identify such
episodes. Therefore, we also recognize that the collection and analysis of locational data across
different housing markets may be of crucial importance to monitoring housing market
developments. We argue more generally that this may warrant increased utilization not only of
disaggregated data but also of panel data techniques, such as the panel GSADF proposed by
Pavlidis et al. (2015), whenever possible.

Our findings indicate that the GSADF test applied to aggregated data is substantially more
powerful than the SADF test and, even more so, than the standard (right-tailed) ADF test. Our
findings suggest that the recursive implementation of the (right-tailed) unit root test is key to
lessening the power loss associated with the use of aggregated data. Thus, the GSADF test

                                                         22
should be preferred to the SADF test (and especially to the standard ADF test) whenever the
researcher is restricted to using aggregated data only.

                                                         23
References

Anderson, T. W., 1959. On asymptotic distributions of estimates of parameters of stochastic
difference equations. Annals of Mathematical Statistics 30, 676­687.

Blanchard, O., Watson, M., 1982. Crisis in the economic and financial structure: Bubbles, bursts,
and shocks. Chapter: Bubbles, rational expectations, and financial markets, 295­315. Watchel
ed., Lexington Books, Lexington, Mass.

Boswijk, H. P., Klaassen, F., 2012. Why frequency matters for unit root testing in financial time
series. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 30 (3), 351­357.

Campbell, J. Y., Perron, P., 1991. Pitfalls and opportunities: What macroeconomists should
know about unit roots. NBER Macroeconomics Annual (vol. 6), eds. O. J. Blanchard and S.
Fisher, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Choi, I., 1992. Effects of data aggregation on the power of tests for a unit root. Economics
Letters 40 (4), 397­401.

Diba, B. T., Grossman, H. I., 1988a. Explosive rational bubbles in stock prices? American
Economic Review 78 (3), 520­530.

Diba, B. T., Grossman, H. I., 1988b. The theory of rational bubbles in stock prices. Economic
Journal 98 (392), 746­754.

Dickey, D. A., Fuller, W. A., 1979. Distribution of the estimators for autoregressive time series
with a unit root. Journal of the American Statistical Association 74 (366a), 427­431.

Engsted, T., Hviid, S. J., Pedersen, T. Q., 2016. Explosive bubbles in house prices? Evidence from
the OECD countries. Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money 40, 14­
25.

Evans, G. W., 1991. Pitfalls in testing for explosive bubbles in asset prices. American Economic
Review 81 (4), 922­930.

Granger, C., Lee, T., 1999. The effect of aggregation on nonlinearity. Econometric Reviews 18
(3), 259­269.

Gurkaynak, R., 2008. Econometric tests of asset price bubbles: Taking stock. Journal of
Economic Surveys 22 (1), 166­186.

Gyourko, J., Mayer, C., Sinai, T., 2006. Superstar cities. National Bureau of Economic Research,
working paper no. 12355.

Homm, U., Breitung, J., 2012. Testing for speculative bubbles in stock markets: A comparison of
alternative methods. Journal of Financial Econometrics 10 (1), 198­231.

                                                         24
Im, K. S., Pesaran, M. H., Shin, Y., 2003. Testing for unit roots in heterogeneous panels. Journal
of Econometrics 115 (1), 53­74.

LeRoy, S., Porter, R., 1981. The present-value relation: Tests based on implied variance bounds.
Econometrica 49, 555­577.

Mack, A., Martínez-García, E., 2011. A cross-country quarterly database of real house prices: A
methodological note. Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper no. 99.
December, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.

Nielsen, B., 2010. Analysis of coexplosive processes. Econometric Theory 26 (3), 882­915.

Pavlidis, E., Yusupova, A., Paya, I., Peel, D., Martínez-García, E., Mack, A., Grossman, V., 2015.
Episodes of exuberance in housing markets: In search of the smoking gun. The Journal of Real
Estate Finance and Economics, pp. 1-31.

Perron, P., 1991. Test consistency with varying sampling frequency. Econometric Theory 7, 341­
368.

Phillips, P.C.B., Magdalinos, T., 2007a. Limit theory for moderate deviations from a unit root.
Journal of Econometrics 136, 115­130.

Phillips, P.C.B., Magdalinos, T., 2007b. The Refinement of econometric estimation and test
procedures: Finite sample and asymptotic analysis, Chapter: Limit theory for moderate
deviations from a unit root under weak dependence, pp. 123­162. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Phillips, P.C.B., Magdalinos, T., 2012. Mildly explosive autoregression under weak and strong
dependence. Journal of Econometrics 169 (2), 179­187.

Phillips, P.C.B., Yu, J., 2011. Dating the timeline of financial bubbles during the subprime crisis.
Quantitative Economics 2 (3), 455­491.

Phillips, P.C.B., Shi, S.-P., Yu, J., 2015. Testing for multiple bubbles: Historical episodes of
exuberance and collapse in the S&P 500. International Economic Review 56 (4), 1043­1078.

Pierse, R. G., Snell, A. J., 1995. Temporal aggregation and the power of tests for a unit root.
Journal of Econometrics 65 (2), 333­345.

Said, S. E.; Dickey, D. A., 1984. Testing for unit roots in autoregressive-moving average models
of unknown order. Biometrika 71 (3), 599­607.

Shiller, R. J., 1981. Do stock prices move too much to be justified by subsequent changes in
dividends? American Economic Review 71, 421­436.

Shiller, R. J., Perron, P., 1985. Testing the random walk hypothesis: Power versus frequency of
observation. Economics Letters 18, 381­386.

                                                         25
West, K. D., 1987. A specification test for speculative bubbles. Quarterly Journal of Economics
102 (3), 553­580.
White, J. S., 1958. The limiting distribution of the serial correlation coefficient in the explosive
case. Annals of Mathematical Statistics 29, 1188­1197.
Yusupova, A., Pavlidis, E. G., Paya, I., Peel, D. A., 2017. Exuberance in the U.K. regional housing
markets. Lancaster University Working Paper 012.

                                                         26
Appendix. Supplementary Materials

A. Recursive Implementation of the Tests: A Graphical Illustration

In this paper we implement a number of right-tailed unit root tests designed to detect the
presence of periods of mildly explosive behavior within sample. These tests include:

1. ADF

2. sup ADF (SADF), see Phillips et al. (2011)

3. Generalized SADF (GSADF), see Phillips et al. (2015)

4. Panel GSADF, see Pavlidis et al. (2015)

These right-tailed unit root tests differ crucially on the recursion mechanism used in their
implementation. In order to illustrate this, we need to review some notation first. The full
sample of  observations is normalized on the interval [0,1]. Here, we denote  and  as the
corresponding fractions of the sample which define the beginning and end of a given subsample
such that 0   <   1. We denote by  =  -  the window size of the regression
estimation, while  is the required fixed initial window which satisfies that the subsample
ending in  is such that   [ , 1] (i.e.,  is the required minimum window size).

The first test is a right-tailed version of the standard ADF unit root test. With the given notation
for a generic recursive mechanism, the implementation of the ADF test can be represented
graphically simply as follows:

     Illustration of the ADF Procedure

  0  Sample interval                    1

      = 1

                                           

     27
The SADF test is based on a proper recursion mechanism based of the ADF test statistics with
an expanding window. The recursion mechanism goes as follows in this case:

                               Illustration of the SADF Procedure

    0                          Sample interval                     1

        = 
                             

                               

                                                                      

The SADF test suffers from a loss of power in the presence of multiple periodically-collapsing
occurrances of mildly explosive behavior. As a prefered alternative, Phillips et al. (2015) suggest
the GSADF test procedure which is a generalization of the SADF test that allows a more flexible
recursion mechanism where the starting point  varies within the range [0,  - ]. The same
recursion mechanism is applied in the panel GSADF procedure of Pavlidis et al. (2015). Formally,
the GSADF test recursion can be illustrated as follows:

             Illustration of the GSADF Procedure

                                        Sample interval                              1

  0                                                                                    

     =  -                                                                              
                                                                   
                                 
                                                                                       
          =  -  

                                                          

                                    =  - 
                                                        

                               

                               28
The GSADF recursion mechanism adopts the following strategy: set   [0,  - ] and  
[ , 1]; use [ ,  ] as a moving window where  =  -  is the corresponding window width
for each subsample; and, then, vary  and  over the full sample.

B. The Dataset of Real House Prices: Local and National Series

We examine the role of cross-sectional aggregation by conducting two large simulation
experiments. The first experiment uses monthly real house price data from the S&P/Case-
Shiller 10-City Composite Index for the 10 largest metropolitan areas in the U.S., deflated by
their corresponding local CPI. The data is illustrated graphically here:

                 U.S. Real House Prices by Major MSA

Index, 2005=100
140

120

100

80

60

40

20              Boston         1997   Chicago                 Denver      2013  2015
                Las Vegas             Los Angeles             Miami
 0              DC                    New York                San Diego
  1987          San Francisco         U.S. Composite 10
                                                          2007 2009 2011
        1989 1991 1993 1995          1999 2001 2003 2005

Notes: Monthly house prices for the S&P/Case-Shiller 10-City Composite Home Price Index and its
constituents, deflated by its corresponding local CPI. The sample covers the period from January 1987 to
February 2016.
Sources: S&P Dow Jones Indices; Bureau of Labor Statistics.

                                     29
The second experiment utilizes national-level, quarterly real house price index data for 23
mostly-advanced economies, deflated with the corresponding country's PCE deflator, obtained
from the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas' international house price database (Mack and
Martínez-García, 2011). The data is illustrated graphically here:

                            Real House Prices by Country

Index, 2005=100
200

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

1975  1980            1985  1990              1995  2000                   2005  2010        2015

      Australia (AU)        Belgium (BE)            Canada (CA)            Switzerland (CH)
                                                                           Finland (FI)
      Germany (DE)          Denmark (DK)            Spain (ES)             Italy (IT)
                                                                           Netherlands (NL)
      France (FR)           U.K. (GB)               Ireland (IE)           U.S. (US)
                                                                           Aggregate
      Japan (JP)            S. Korea (KR)           Luxembourg (LU)

      Norway (NO)           New Zealand (NZ)        Sweden (SE)

      S. Africa (ZA)        Croatia (HR)            Israel (IL)
Notes: Covers 23 countries, deflated with the country PCE deflator.

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas (Mack and Martínez-García (2011)).

                                           30
C. Mapping the Power Gains of the GSADF Test Procedure Over the SADF Test Procedure
In accordance with the simulation results reported in Chart 1 for our first experiment based on
real house prices for the major metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) in the U.S., we summarize
the power gains achieved by the GSADF test over the SADF test for each one of the constituent
series in the following map:

A striking contrast emerges from looking at Boston and Miami for which the power gain of the
GSADF test is under 20 percent (0.2 in units) while the power gain exceeds 80 percent (0.8 in
units) for Los Angeles (LA). By comparing the results for the two tests--the SADF and the GSADF
tests--we observe that the GSADF test performs remarkably better than the SADF but with
significant variation across MSAs.

                                                         31
In accordance with the simulation results reported in Chart 2 for our second experiment based
on real house prices for the 23 countries covered by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas'
international house price database (Mack and Martínez-García, 2011), we summarize the
power gains achieved by the GSADF test over the SADF test for each one of the constituent
series in the following map:

A striking contrast emerges from looking at Ireland (IE), South Korea (KR), and Norway (NO) for
which the power gain of the GSADF test is under 20 percent (0.2 in units) while the power gain
exceeds 80 percent (0.8 in units) for the Netherlands (NL). By comparing the results across
tests, we confirm that the GSADF test performs much better than the SADF with national
indexes, but still find significant variation in the realized gains across locations.

                                                         32
