      "Not everything that can be counted counts, and not everything that counts can be counted."
                                                                                     Albert Einstein (attributed)

    IPA transcription: "/nt `vri ðæt khæn bi `khawntd khawnts, n nt `vri ðæt khawnts
                                                                                            khæn bi `khawntd/"

                                                                                  `ælbrt `ajnstajn ( `trbjtd)

1 Introduction

Econometric research on panel data suggests that studies based solely on a given time series
could be biased by not incorporating the information content of the cross-section. Not only can
panel data provide additional information, it also gives greater sample variation that can be
exploited to obtain more precise parameter estimates--see, e.g., Baltagi (2008) on this point.
While this is well-known in theory, the use of panel data has many limitations. The heterogeneity
and noise of international data sources has always complicated and even restrained the scope of
panel data analysis (and the use of related econometric techniques) in empirical work on
housing.

Those same data limitations have skewed the evidence available to guide the theoretical work on
the macroeconomic effects of housing and the determinants of house prices--especially on open-
economy models. The stylized facts that theory seeks to understand are still largely derived from
a reduced country sample--primarily the U.S. as illustrated, e.g., by Davis and Heathcote (2005)
and Davis (2010)). Our efforts to develop a consistent panel of international house prices and
other housing indicators, therefore, seeks to mitigate the concerns about the comparability of the
data and to facilitate the empirical and theoretical research in this area.

As indicated, lack of comparability complicates the research on international house prices. The
main contribution of our work is, therefore, sorting out the existing data by country, selecting the
most similar series and documenting the differences across countries to clarify the extent to
which international sources can be made comparable for empirical analysis purposes. As a result,
we construct a panel dataset of house price indexes starting in the first quarter of 1975, which is
released regularly to the public at quarterly frequency. We also maintain all vintages of the
country series for researchers interested in the effect of data revisions, and complement the
database with the corresponding indexes on personal disposable income (PDI) per capita. PDIs
per capita can be used to control for changes in the affordability of housing, so as not to treat
house price movements in isolation.

1.1 Outline

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the standard methods used to
construct a representative house price index, and explains the selection criteria used to obtain
comparable reference indexes for house prices. It also outlines the national income and product
accounts and the relevant definitions of income used to construct the corresponding indexes of
PDI per capita. Section 3 briefly describes our own methodology to extend the reference series,
and seasonally-adjust the data. It discusses the aggregation method that we use on the house
price and PDI index series as well. Section 3 also explains how the database is maintained and
the quarterly updating process that we follow, after a sufficient number of countries in our
sample have reported the necessary data. Section 4 provides a detailed discussion of the national
data sources and describes the implementation of our methodology to construct a house price
index series expressed in nominal and real terms for each country. It also notes the sources of
PDI data, working-age population data, and the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE)
deflator for every country.
The appendix contains a brief description of the data sources as well as a series of tables
summarizing the key characteristics of the data by country and by the characteristics of the
dwellings. Future drafts of this note will contain notice of any refinements or modifications of
the methodology described here as well as detailed references to any new series that might be
added to the database.

Prices from around the world, all under one roof.
