3 Methodological Approach

3.1 Timing of Releases

The international house price database is updated quarterly, but we face great heterogeneity in
the timing of each country's data releases. We have found a significant number of countries
report the data needed to include a new quarterly observation of the (nominal and real) house
price and PDI index series three months after the end of each quarter.17 As a practical
compromise between the timeliness of the release and the country coverage, we schedule the
posting of the international house price database during four fixed periods each year
incorporating already a three month lag. The schedule for a given year T, therefore, is:

Table 3. Yearly Timeline of Release Dates

Last Quarter Included  Release Date
Fourth Quarter of T-1  First full week of April of T
First Quarter of T
Second Quarter of T    First full week of July of T
Third Quarter of T     First full week of October of T
                       First full week of January of T+1

We aim to have the dataset posted during the week indicated in Table 3. We will apply the same
schedule for data releases every year, unless the release lag of the country data on which the
panel depends were to change, requiring us to adjust this schedule to preserve both its wide
coverage and representativeness. The schedule of data releases for the current and subsequent
years can be found on the web.

Whenever observations are missing for a country's house price or PDI index, we complete the
series for the current release with nowcasts derived with the basic structural time series (BSTS)
model that we describe in Section 3.7 below. The dataset will be revised in subsequent quarters
to incorporate the country data, as the corresponding quarterly observations become available.

17 Country coverage usually represents more than 80 percent of total output from all countries included in the
sample, measured by their 2005 GDP in purchasing power parity adjusted terms according to the IMF.

Prices from around the world, all under one roof.
3.2 Approach to Construct the Country Data: Step-by-Step

The FHFA house price index series (formerly called OFHEO house price index) serves as our
benchmark measure when selecting a house price index for the other countries in the database.
The main selection criteria--and preference--are given to: geographic coverage (nationwide);
vintage of dwellings (existing); type of dwellings (single-family); priced unit (per dwelling);
availability of data (1975 - present); and frequency (quarterly). The disposable personal income
series by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) serves as our benchmark measure when
selecting or reconstructing the PDI index for the other countries, although not all accounting
differences across countries can be fully reconciled with the BEA concept. The PDI measure for
some countries is derived from national account aggregates using the accounting relationships
discussed in Section 2.2 above.

The methodological decision tree found in Figure 3 below describes the steps we follow to
derive consistent series by combining the available sources for each country in the panel. The
same approach is applied to all series in the international house price database. The motivation
behind each step is to maintain consistency across countries, while limiting data distortions as
much as possible.

The reference series for each country is its most current one, since it is selected for being the
most consistent with the benchmark series (FHFA house price index and disposable personal
income) and for having data available up to the present. In most cases, the reference series does
not extend all the way back to the first quarter of 1975, and it has to be completed with other
series which we refer to as the historical series. We label the combined series that goes back to
the first quarter of 1975 as the extended or the full-length series.

Old vintages of the international house price database are kept for researchers interested in real-
time data analysis.
Figure 3. Methodological Decision Tree for the Construction of Time Series Data

Does primary series    No        Is historical data No              Backcast
   extend back to             available since 1975?
                                                                (if 1-2 years missing)
1975Q1?                             Yes
                                                                 Convert lower
Yes                           Are data frequencies             frequency to match
                                consistent across No            higher frequency
                                      series?
                                    Yes                                data.

                                  Are irregular           Yes    Smooth the series
                              components present               with excess volatility

                              in any series?

                                                   No

                              Splice with growth
                                      rates

Is the primary series  No           Nowcast
    current? Is it
                              (if current observation is
quarterly?                          not available)

Yes                                Frequency
                                  Conversion
   Is seasonality or
volatility still present Yes  (if the primary series is
                                    not quarterly)
     in the data?
                                  Smooth and
       No                     Seasonally-Adjust

Construct Index

Prices from around the world, all under one roof.
3.3 Frequency Conversion Methods

Frequency conversion is often required in order to report the house price and PDI indexes at a
quarterly frequency. We are confronted with the problem of converting high-frequency data
(monthly) to quarterly data as well as the problem of converting low-frequency data (semi-
annual, annual, bi-annual) to quarterly data.

If the series has a higher frequency, then we use a simple average of the monthly observations in
order to report the time series at quarterly frequency. This makes use of all available data and
produces observations that summarize the quarterly patterns of the data.18

Interpolation is applied to the latter problem, but it is worth pointing out that interpolating
procedures can only provide estimates between known data points, since quarterly data are not
observed. In other words, it tries to complete the series by fitting a curve to the known data
points which can then be used to infer plausible outcomes for the unknown quarterly
observations. The method of interpolation will be determined by the features that are most
desirable for the interpolated data. We discuss the implementation of the frequency conversion
methods in greater detail in Section 3.3.1 below.

3.3.1 Quarterly Interpolation

Interpolation methods are used for the conversion of low frequency to high frequency data--that
is, for temporal disaggregation whenever no additional source of high frequency data is available
to facilitate the conversion.19 Interpolation in the context of the international house price
database can be defined as fitting a curve over measurements made at the sampled periods to
infer unsampled quarters with which they must conform. Standard interpolating methods include
constant piecewise, linear, polynomial (quadratic, cubic,...), and spline, among others.

If the observed time series has a lower frequency (semi-annual, annual, or bi-annual) than the
database (quarterly), our preferred choice for interpolation is to use the quadratic-match average
(or the quadratic-match sum) method to interpolate the data to a quarterly frequency.20

The quadratic-match methods do not guarantee that the curve fitted would satisfy non-negativity,
even if the observed data points are all positive. This is a problem especially in countries that
experienced periods of hyperinflation or severe inflation within the sample covered by the
international house price database (such as Croatia). We resolve the issue interpolating the

18 A note of caution, averaging may induce a spurious first-order serial correlation effect in the differenced series as
shown by Working (1960) among others.
19 Different econometric disaggregation techniques, such as the Denton (1971) and Chow and Lin (1971) approaches
to cite just two of the most popular methods, can also be used for quarterization. These techniques interpolate the
low frequency data at quarterly frequency using related indicator variables that are reported themselves at quarterly
frequency. We generally do not have access to quarterly indicators that can be used with the available data for
temporal disaggregation of the series in the international house price database.
20 A note of caution, interpolating with a quadratic function introduces a systematic source of serial correlation in the
regressors because data points are related to each other by a quadratic polynomial. This must be taken into account
when using time series with interpolated data for the purpose of statistical inference--that is, standard errors should
be made robust to autocorrelation in hypothesis testing.
logged series, and then use the growth rate in log-differences to splice and extend the data
backwards. In all other cases, interpolation is conducted with the series expressed in levels.

Interpolation is performed in two stages. In the first stage of interpolation, the objective is to
report the current and historical series at the same frequency, so they can be spliced together.21 If
the historical series is reported at a lower frequency than the current series, but the frequency of
the current series is lower than quarterly, then the historical series is interpolated to the same
frequency as the current series rather than at quarterly frequency. For example, in the case of
Italian house prices, the historical series is reported bi-annually and the current series is reported
semi-annually. In the first stage, the historical series is interpolated to a semi-annual frequency
and then spliced with the current series. In the second stage of interpolation (if this step were
necessary), the objective is to report the extended series at a quarterly frequency. Again, using
the Italian house price series as an example, once the bi-annual series is interpolated to a semi-
annual frequency and spliced with the current series, the extended series is interpolated to
quarterly frequency.

3.4 Seasonal-Adjustment Method

In order for quarterly data to be useful for researchers or for policy analysis, the series must be
reported to reflect the true underlying patterns of the data. Seasonal-adjustment aims to pinpoint
economically relevant features of the data (trend and cycle), but irregular components (outliers,
breaks) may also be present. In which case, seasonal-adjustment might not be sufficient in
removing all the irrelevant noise in an observed series. Hence, we develop and implement a
smoothing algorithm based on the basic structural time series (BSTS) model, fitted to the data in
order to remove both seasonality and the effect of unrelated irregular noise.

We give preference to data not seasonally-adjusted by the source because then we can apply the
BSTS model in a manner that consistently treats the effect of seasonality across countries and
series. The seasonal adjustment procedures used by the sources often vary by country--the U.S.
Census Bureau family of seasonal adjustment procedures (such as X-12) or the Bank of
Spain/Eurostat TRAMO-SEATS package--which introduce heterogeneity in the data. In cases
when the original data is only reported seasonally-adjusted (such as South Africa's PDI), we use
it without further correction unless the seasonal adjustment by the source appears insufficient to
remove all seasonality and the irregular noise in the time series. We would then apply a variant
of the BSTS model to this data in order to obtain the final seasonally-adjusted, smoothed series
for the international house price database.

The specification of the BSTS model in state-space form is both simple to estimate and very
flexible capturing the relevant components of the data. It produces estimates of the seasonal
factors that are comparable to those obtained with other conventional methods (such as X-12 and
TRAMO/SEATS), while providing an integrated framework for the removal of irregular
components, and can also be used for backcasting and nowcasting.22 We further discuss the uses
of the BSTS model in Section 3.7 below. For a more formal evaluation of the BSTS model for

21 We provide details on the implementation of the splicing method in Section 3.5.
22 We discuss the backcasting and nowcasting uses of the BSTS model in Section 3.7.

Prices from around the world, all under one roof.
seasonal adjustment and the treatment of irregular components, the interested reader is referred
to Martínez-García (2014).

If seasonality or large irregular noise components are present in the current series but not in the
historical series (especially when the historical series is derived from interpolated data), we
remove the seasonality and irregular components from the current series before splicing--using
the BSTS model. In general, we seasonally-adjust the individual data series contained in an
extended series separately whenever they display very different seasonality or irregular patterns,
then splice the smoothed series. If the seasonal patterns of the individual series appear similar,
they are first spliced, then seasonal adjustment is applied to the extended series. The seasonal
adjustment with the BSTS model is performed on data with a frequency higher than annual, but
it can be implemented with interpolated data as it removes some of the irregular patterns in the
data that may follow from the implementation of the quadratic-match procedure.

3.5 Splicing Method

All series are spliced together using the growth rates of the longer historical series in order to
extend the level of the shorter current time series backward in time. Splicing with exact growth
rates is preferred, but we use log-differences in the case of countries that have undergone a
period of severe inflation within the sample (such as Croatia). The historical time series are
selected by availability in order to reasonably track the changes of the reference series.

Splicing the current series with the growth rates of the historical series may not extend the series
as far back as 1975. In which case, the historical series is complemented with backcasted data,
where additional observations--not representing more than two years--are obtained using the
best fitted BSTS model for the available historical time series. Time series backcasting is used to
extend the house price indexes of Spain and the Netherlands from the first quarter of 1976 back
to the first quarter of 1975.23 Before splicing the series, we perform the minimal adjustments
needed to obtain consistent frequency across series and remove any irregular components or
seasonality.

Nowcasting is applied primarily in order to ensure the timeliness and completeness of the
international house price database release when the current series of reference for a country is
missing some recent observations due to lags in reporting from the national sources or simply
because the reported data is produced at a lower-than-quarterly frequency.

Nowcasting is used, for example, with the annual consumption of fixed capital series of Belgium
and the U.K. The data at a lower-than-quarterly frequency is extended with a historical series and
augmented with the nowcasted value for the unobserved year that includes the current quarter.
Then, the series is interpolated to a quarterly frequency. If the current series is reported at
quarterly frequency, but the reporting lag results in missing observations for the most recent
quarters, we use nowcasted values for those missing observations. The nowcasted values will
subsequently be replaced with actual data from their respective national sources, as those

23 Backcasting estimates are obtained by re-ordering the original data xt backwards from the end of the sample (t =
T) to the beginning of the sample (t = 1), and then running a regression model to forecast the data of the series xt
prior to t = 1.
observations become available. We finally seasonally-adjust the extended quarterly series, except
when the seasonal patterns or other irregular components of the data appear not to be
statistically-significant.
All nowcasts and backcasts are derived from the best fitted specification of the BSTS model.
This is an estimated regression model that is used for seasonal-adjustment and smoothing as
well, where the underlying components of each time series--decomposed in trend, cycle,
seasonal factors, and irregular noise--are fitted at each point by Maximum Likelihood and
updated iteratively with the help of the Kalman filter. In Section 3.7 below, we give further
interpretation to the BSTS model and a short overview of the methodology as it is implemented
in the international house price database. We leave the more technical details for the interested
reader to be found in Martínez-García (2014).
3.6 Approach to Aggregate the Country Data
All country series at quarterly frequency and extended going back to the first quarter of 1975 are
then indexed to 2005=100. The country series are aggregated to produce global indicators of the
housing market, using weights that account for the size of the economy of each country
incorporated in the database. We use the 2005 purchasing power-parity adjusted (annual) GDP
shares of all countries in the sample as constant weights to derive our aggregate nominal house
price index and our aggregate real house price index. Similarly, we use these constant GDP
weights to aggregate the nominal and real PDI series. All GDP shares are obtained from the IMF
World Economic Outlook database.

Prices from around the world, all under one roof.
3.7 More in Depth: An Overview of the Basic Structural Time Series (BSTS) Model

We use the BSTS approach as follows,

    - The estimation of the BSTS model corrects for seasonality at quarterly frequency and
         also accounts for other extraneous irregular noise that may be present in the observed
         time series (historical or current). Noisy series and/or series with a statistically-significant
         quarterly seasonal pattern are reported as the combination of the smoothed trend and
         cycle components, therefore excluding both the noise and seasonality from the series.

    - The BSTS model is used for backcasting and nowcasting in order to extend some time
         series at the beginning and end of their samples. The estimated model produces accurate
         backcasts/nowcasts with otherwise minimal effort in identification, but it is most
         appropriate either in short- to medium-horizons where observed data patterns are likely to
         continue or whenever changes in the time series occur slowly over time.
         Backcasts/nowcasts are used in practice with at most 1-2 years back/ahead for that
         reason.

3.7.1 All-Encompassing BSTS Model Specification

Given a time series yt, t = {1,...,T}, the standard BSTS model of Harvey (1989) decomposes the
data additively as follows,

  yt  t  ct  st  et , et  NID2
0,                           e  , t  1, 2,...,T ,                      (1)

where t is the time-varying trend, which captures the long-run evolution of the series as a
function of time; ct is the cycle, which denotes transitory movements in the series around its
trend; st represents the seasonal factor, which captures a recurrent movement in the series that
repeats itself at fairly regular intervals; and et is an irregular (and random) component called

noise, error term, or disturbance term, which includes other non-modeled, exogenous, and
intrinsically irrelevant factors affecting the observed series (the signal).

These four components can also be combined multiplicatively in the time series to produce the
log-additive model specification,

  yt                                             2
 exp t  exp ct  exp st  exp et  , et  NID  0,    e  , t  1, 2,...,T ,  (2)

which has many applications in the international house price database. This log-additive model
specification reduces to the additive specification in (1) whenever we work with logged values.
Hence, the BSTS model can be discussed solely in its additive form even though we actually
consider the log-additive case as well in our implementation.
All four constituent components t , ct , st , et  are stochastic, and the disturbances driving them

are mutually uncorrelated in general. The extraneous noise component et is modeled as white

noise, while the trend t , cycle ct and seasonal factor st are all assumed to follow a particular

model. As stated earlier, we consider a stochastic polynomial model of order two or lower for

the trend component t . We assume a covariance-stationary AR(p) process for the transitory

component of the time series described by the cycle ct . We also assume a stochastic version of
the standard "seasonal factors" model adding up to a random shock to capture time-variation in
the seasonality. For the reasons stated before, we consider both the additive as well as the log-
additive specifications of the BSTS model under consideration but describe the modeling choices

for the unobserved components t , ct , st  on the additive case only. For more details on the

exact state-space form of each variant of the BSTS model that we actually explore and a further
discussion of the methodology and its advantages, the interested reader is referred to Martínez-
García (2014).

The additive, univariate specification of the all-encompassing BSTS model is given by,

t  {1,...,T}

                                              0,       2
                                                       e

  yt   t  ct  st  et ,          et  NID                      ,        signal equation (decomposition equation),



                                              0,    2                 state equation (local polynominal trend),
                                                    

  t     t 1      bt1     t,     t    NID                  ,

  bt  bt1  t1  t , t  NID                     0,    2  ,
                                                    

  t  t1   t ,  t  NID                0,    2  ,
                                           



  ct  1ct1  2ct11  t , t  NID                       0,    2     ,     state equation (AR(2) cycle),
                                                          

ct1  ct1,



  
                  s1      s2                                       2  , state equation (stochastic seasonal),
                   t 1     t 1                                     
  st    st1                      t ,  t       NID         0,    

  s1      st ,                                                                                                   (3)
   t 1    st1,

  s2
   t 1

where the component t represents the unobserved level, bt determines the unobserved linear
term on the time-trend, and t is the unobserved quadratic term on the time trend. For
specifications with a cyclical component ct , an AR(2) (or AR(1)) process is used for reference.
For specifications with seasonality, the quarterly seasonal component st is recurrent and its time-

Prices from around the world, all under one roof.
invariant coefficients must sum up to a random disturbance. The random disturbances et ,  j , t ,
 t , t , and t are normally distributed, and mutually independent at all leads and lags.

The  parameters   of    the  model  include    up   to  six  variances     for  the  random  disturbances,     2  0,
                                                                                                               e

  2    0,    2    0,    2    0,  2    0,  and    2      0.  The  list  of  parameters  also  includes  p  (p2  in  our
                                                 

specification of reference) autoregressive coefficients used to describe the AR(p) cyclical

component of the time series. The model description is incomplete without a specification of

  priors for 0, b0,0, c0, c01, s0, s01, s02 , which we generally take to be diffuse priors in all our

estimations.
3.7.2 BSTS Model Estimation, Backcasting/Nowcasting and Forecasting

We represent all variants of the BSTS model in state-space form and estimate their time-varying,
unobserved components by Maximum Likelihood. The advantage of assuming the normality of
the disturbances is that it simplifies the estimation of the model in state-space form by Maximum
Likelihood, and also allows us to use the Gaussian Kalman (Bucy) filter. The Kalman filter
algorithm is applied to recursively update the model with new observed data that contains noise
(random variation) to produce a statistically optimal prediction and forecast of the unobserved
states (cycle, trend, and seasonal) that characterizes the time series along with its corresponding
uncertainties. The main assumptions of the Kalman filter are that the model be a linear dynamic
system and that the error term (irregular noise on the observed series) and all state disturbances
have a Gaussian distribution.

Nowcasting and forecasting are fairly standard in this case. Backcasting is accomplished by re-
ordering the original data yt from t=T to t=1 (in reverse order) and then running the estimation
and forecasting algorithm under the same state-space model specification chosen to fit the data.
Maximum Likelihood estimation and the recursive Kalman filter are exploited to obtain
estimates of the initial states and forecasts of the series in reverse order (backcasts).

3.7.3 BSTS Model Selection

Selecting an appropriate model specification depends on: (a) whether the data is trending or not
(in other words, the series is non-stationary)? (b) whether the series has a transitory component
or cycle that is stationary? (c) whether there is seasonality in the data? and (d) whether the noise
and irregular components are well-approximated as independent and identically distributed
Gaussian random disturbances? Model selection would consider alternative specifications of the
cyclical AR(p) component and the seasonal model--including variants without them--based on
standard likelihood-based selection criteria (primarily the Akaike Information Criterion),
strongly favoring the less-parameterized and less-complex specification of the model. For further
discussion on the goodness-of-fit in-sample and the forecast accuracy out-of-sample as well as
the actual implementation of the model selection procedures, the interested reader is referred to
Martínez-García (2014).

Prices from around the world, all under one roof.
