                          Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
                  Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute

                                Working Paper No. 165

http://www.dallasfed.org/assets/documents/institute/wpapers/2013/0165.pdf

Episodes of Exuberance in Housing Markets:
         In Search of the Smoking Gun*

Efthymios Pavlidis                                                       Alisa Yusupova
Lancaster University                                                Lancaster University

Iván Payá                                                                      David Peel
Lancaster University                                                Lancaster University

Enrique Martínez-García                                                   Adrienne Mack
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas                                         Mutual of Omaha

                                           Valerie Grossman
                                    Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas

                           December 2013
                          Revised: June 2015

Abstract
In this paper, we examine changes in the time series properties of standard housing market
indicators (real house prices, price-to-income ratios, and price-to-rent ratios) for a large set
of countries to detect episodes of explosive dynamics. Dating exuberance in housing markets
provides a timeline as well as empirical content to the narrative connecting housing
exuberance to the global 200809 recession. For our investigation, we employ two recursive
univariate unit root tests developed by Phillips et al. (2011) and Phillips et al. (2015). We also
propose a novel extension of the Phillips et al. (2015) test to a panel setting in order to
exploit the large cross-sectional dimension of our international dataset. Statistically
significant periods of exuberance are found in most countries. Moreover, there is also strong
evidence of an unprecedented period of exuberance in the early 2000s that eventually
collapsed around 200607, preceding the 200809 global recession. We find that long-term
interest rates, credit growth and global economic conditions help to predict (in-sample)
episodes of housing exuberance. We conclude that global macro and financial factors explain
(partly) the synchronization of exuberance episodes that we detect in the data in the 2000s.

JEL codes: C22, G12, R31

* Efthymios G. Pavlidis, e.pavlidis@lancaster.ac.uk, Alisa Yusupova, a.yusupova@lancaster.ac.uk, Ivan
Paya, i.paya@lancaster.ac.uk, and David Peel, d.peel@lancaster.ac.uk, from Lancaster University
Management School. Enrique Martínez-García, enrique.martinez-garcia@dal.frb.org, and Valerie
Grossman, valerie.grossman@dal.frb.org, from the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. Adrienne Mack,
Mutual of Omaha, adrienne.mack@ymail.com, worked on the paper while at the Dallas Fed. The
International House Price Database is available at http://www.dallasfed.org/institute/houseprice/index.cfm.
An earlier draft circulated as "Monitoring Housing Markets for Periods of Exuberance. An Application of
the Phillips et al. (2012, 2013) GSADF Test on the Dallas Fed International House Price Database." All
remaining errors are ours alone. The views in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas or the Federal Reserve System.
1 Introduction

The latest boom and bust in international housing markets has generated a renewed interest in the dynamics
of house prices. A view shared by many academics and policy makers is that the latest boom period in
housing was associated with house prices departing from their intrinsic values which led to a misallocation of
resources, distorted investment patterns, and eventually precipitated the 2008 09 global recession. On this
basis, in the aftermath of the crisis, international organizations and central bankers have become increasingly
more concerned about developments in housing markets across the world (e.g., IMF established the Global
Housing Watch and the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas created the International House Price Database).
Central banks have also become more aware of the role of domestic housing markets in ...nancial stability
and the real economy (see, e.g., the 2014 U.K. stress testing exercise of the Bank of England).

    In this paper we analyze changes in the time series properties of house prices over the last four decades
in an attempt to shed light on three research questions: Firstly, when did house price run-ups turn into
episodes of exuberance (displaying explosive dynamics) in domestic housing markets, secondly, was there
synchronization across countries that led to global exuberance and, ...nally, which were the fundamental
factors that aided in the emergence of housing exuberance. By addressing these research questions we aim
at improving our understanding of housing markets in a way that facilitates the development of better
monitoring mechanisms and the design of more e¤ective and proactive policies.

    An appealing feature of our empirical analysis is the use of panel data from the International House Price
Database of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas (Mack and Martínez-García (2011)) to detect and date-
stamp explosive autoregressive behavior in housing markets. This dataset has a large panel dimension (22
countries), which allows us to have a unique, international perspective on the evolution of housing markets.1

    With respect to our ...rst research question, we employ two univariate econometric tests (namely, the sup
ADF , SADF , and the Generalized sup ADF , GSADF ) recently developed by Phillips et al. (2011) and
Phillips et al. (2015) in order to examine whether real house prices and standard long-run anchors of the
housing market, such as price-to-income and price-to-rent ratios, exhibit periods of mild explosive behavior.2
The SADF and GSADF are right-tailed unit root tests that perform recursive ADF regressions to test
for explosiveness. Their recursive nature makes the SADF and GSADF tests attractive in our context
for two reasons. First, the tests enable us to identify in which (if any) periods a series displayed explosive
behavior and, thus, date the emergence of exuberance in domestic housing markets. Second, they exhibit
higher power in the presence of boom and bust episodes than standard integration/cointegration tests and
tests that allow for a single (permanent) change in persistence.3

    A timeline of events emerges from the corresponding dating procedure which suggests that the latest
boom-bust cycle was unusually widespread across countries and evolved in three phases: A ...rst phase

    1 We complement the Dallas Fed dataset with housing rents from the OECD for 16 of the 22 countries for which there is
consistent data over the same sample period (Girouard et al. (2006)).

    2 Mildly explosive behavior is modeled by an autoregressive process with a root that exceeds unity, but remains within the
vicinity of one. This represents a small departure from martingale behavior, but is consistent with the submartingale property
often used in the rational bubbles literature (see section 2 for further details). Phillips and Magdalinos (2007a), Phillips and
Magdalinos (2007b) and Phillips and Magdalinos (2012) provide a large sample asymptotic theory for this class of processes
that enables econometric inference in this case, unlike for purely explosive processes.

    3 The SADF and GSADF tests better detect mildly explosive behavior in time series data than standard methods such as
unit root/cointegration tests (e.g., Diba and Grossman (1988)), but also variance bound tests (e.g., LeRoy and Porter (1981),
Shiller (1981)), speci...cation tests (e.g., West (1987)), and Chow and CUSUM-type tests (e.g., Homm and Breitung (2012)).
Few studies have implemented these techniques in the context of housing markets (e.g., Phillips and Yu (2011); Yiu et al.
(2013)), but only on domestic markets.

                                                                      1
of origination connected with the U.S. experience during the second half of the 1990s; a second phase
of propagation that is characterized by widespread and synchronized episodes of exuberance across very
di¤erent housing markets during the ...rst half of the 2000s; and a ...nal phase where the episode of exuberance
burst within a short period of time and was followed by the severe contraction in economic activity of the
2008 09 global recession. In light of the substantial di¤erences across domestic housing markets and the
non-tradability of housing, the pattern of near-simultaneous explosive behavior in the ...rst half of the 2000s
is a particularly interesting ...nding.

    However, the SADF and GSADF are univariate testing procedures and, thus, only allow us to draw
conclusions at the country level. To address our second research question, we propose a novel extension
of the GSADF procedure to a panel setting inspired by the work of Im et al. (2003) which exploits the
large cross-sectional dimension of the International House Price Database in order to draw inferences for
the global housing market. The extension is easy to compute and, like the univariate methods, provides
a date-stamping strategy. The results for our Panel GSADF test provide a very clear picture of global
exuberance in housing markets in the period preceding the global 2008 09 recession between 2000 and
2006.

    Having identi...ed periods of explosive behavior at both the domestic and the international levels, we
turn to our third research question which deals with the factors that contribute to increase the likelihood
of exuberance emerging in housing. A widely used explanation for the presence of boom and bust episodes
is the existence of housing bubbles (see, e.g., Case and Shiller (2003); Mayer (2011); Shiller (2015)). In a
rational expectations framework, rational bubbles can arise simply due to market participants'expectations
of future price increases (Flood and Hodrick (1990)). This type of bubble processes follow explosive paths
which makes asset prices diverge from their fundamental values and induces exuberance in housing markets.
On the basis of this rationale, several authors have employed integration and cointegration tests to examine
the presence of house price bubbles (see, e.g., Hott and Monnin (2008); Mikhed and Zemcik (2009b); André
et al. (2014)).

    As we show in the following section, non-stationary dynamics in house prices may also arise from causes
other than bubbles, such as explosive dynamics in economic fundamentals and time-varying discount rates.
For this reason, although we recognize that bubbles can cause explosive behavior in house prices, we refrain
from using the term bubbles in the interpretation of our ...ndings. Cappozza et al. (2004), for example, ...nd
that the time series properties of house prices in 62 United States metro areas depend on a set of economic
variables that proxy for information costs, supply costs, and expectations.4 Agnello and Schuknecht (2011)
and Rousová and van den Noord (2011), among other recent studies, look at fundamental predictors of
housing booms and busts as well as turning points in the housing cycle of OECD countries. According
to their ...ndings, domestic credit and interest rates are amongst the most important predictors of booms
and busts, while macro aggregates (like unemployment) can be helpful in predicting peaks and troughs.
In related research, Chen (2009) and Nyberg (2013) examine which macroeconomic and ...nancial variables
impact the future likelihood of a bull and bear market. By analyzing data for 18 OECD countries, they ...nd
evidence that asset price booms, characterized by rapid price appreciation above estimated trends, generally
are preceded by similarly rapid expansions in monetary aggregates and ination. They also ...nd that ...nancial

    4 The existing empirical evidence points out that house prices may temporarily deviate from fundamentals (e.g., the time
series and cross-section evidence in Clayton (1996); Hwang and Quigley (2006); Mikhed and Zemcik (2009a); Cappozza et al.
(2004); Adams and Fuss (2010)) and the importance of the bank lending channel in housing (e.g., Mian and Su... (2009); Pavlov
and Wachter (2011); Berkovec et al. (2012)).

                                                                      2
variables are useful predictors, especially for bear markets.
    We contribute to this literature by assessing whether the probability of a housing market being in a state

of exuberance depends on a set of macroeconomic and ...nancial variables that have been reported to be
important drivers of house prices. Our results provide evidence in favor of in-sample predictability with the
best predictors being long-run interest rates, private credit growth, demand-side factors (such as per capita
real disposable income growth) and global economic conditions. These results highlight the important ripple
e¤ects of declining long-term interest rates in the synchronization of housing market exuberance and also
conform with the anecdotal evidence that during the boom years prior to the 2008 09 global recession,
international investors-- reaping the bene...ts of strong global growth-- fuelled house price run-ups across
many di¤erent countries.

    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 outlines the standard asset-pricing model of
housing and illustrates how explosive behavior in house prices may arise. Section 3 describes the SADF and
GSADF testing procedures, as well as the extension of the latter to a panel setting. The following section
presents and discusses the empirical results for the the univariate and panel unit root tests and the panel
probit on the likelihood of an episode of exuberance occurring. Special attention is paid to the U.S., the
U.K. and Spain due their economic size and signi...cance, and because these countries exemplify the distinct
patterns observed during the three main phases of the timeline of events that we describe in the paper.
Finally, Section 5 provides concluding remarks.

2 House Prices, Fundamentals and Rational Bubbles

A conventional framework for the study of explosive behavior in housing markets is provided by the standard
asset-pricing model with risk neutral agents (see, e.g., Clayton (1996); Hiebert and Sydow (2011)).5 In this
framework, the price of housing can be derived from the following no-arbitrage condition,

|{z}                     =     |Et (R{zt+1})            ;  (1)

constant risk-free rate     expected return on housing

where > 0 denotes the (for time being constant) discount rate-- the expected net return on an alternative
investment opportunity-- while Et is the expectations operator based on all information available up to time
t, and Rt+1 is the return on housing at time t + 1 de...ned as,

Rt+1                     Pt+1 + Ft+1  1;                   (2)
                               Pt

where Pt denotes the house price, and Ft is the stream of payo¤s (pecuniary or otherwise) derived from
housing.

    We refer to Ft as the economic fundamentals of the housing market, and work out our analysis with two
related speci...cations. One general speci...cation of Ft includes the payo¤ stream Xt, which is given by the
observed economic rents of housing, including housing services, and another component Ut that is either

    5 The asset-pricing approach to housing builds on the extensive rational bubbles literature (see, e.g., the seminal work of
Blanchard (1979) and Blanchard and Watson (1982)).

                            3
unobserved or reects mismeasurement of the housing rents, i.e.,

                                                         Ft = Xt + Ut:                                                                                  (3)

The other speci...cation of Ft relates the payo¤ stream of housing rents Xt to macroeconomic fundamentals
through a demand equation for rental housing but retains an unobserved (or mismeasurement) term Ut.
Under a set of constraints on preferences, we can derive a linear expenditure system where the demand for
rental housing linearly relates rents Xt to macroeconomic fundamentals such as disposable income Yt, i.e.,

                                                 Ft = F + Yt + Ut:                                                                                      (4)

The Appendix provides details on the derivation of this relationship which captures the a¤ordability deter-
minants of housing.6

    Using the de...nition of the return on housing Rt in (2) and re-arranging the no-arbitrage condition in
(1), yields the following expression for house prices,7

                                                         1                                                                                              (5)
                                                 Pt = 1 + Et [Pt+1 + Ft+1] ;

which indicates that the price today must be equal to the discounted present-value of the expected funda-

mentals plus the re-sale price of housing tomorrow. Recursive substitution of this asset pricing equation

yields the standard present-value model for the price of housing (see, e.g., Clayton (1996)).

By recursively substituting T periods forward, equation (5) can be re-written as

                    "  XT                        1j                                    #"         1T                #

           Pt = Et                              j=1 1 +                           Ft+j + Et 1 +              Pt+T :                                     (6)

According to the above expression, the house price at time t is a function of the expected discounted ow

of all future payo¤s up to time T plus the discounted re-sale value of the house at time T . Letting T go to

                                                                                    1  T
                                                                                  1+
in...nity and imposing the transversality lim Et                                          Pt+T = 0 to rule out non-fundamental behavior

                                                                            T !1

(bubbles), the unique solution to the expectational di¤erence equation in (5) yields

                                                 "X1                                   1j         #

                       Pt = Et                                                    j=1 1 +         Ft+j ;                                                (7)

where Pt is referred to as the fundamental price of housing due to the fact that it is a function solely
of economic fundamentals Ft and the discount rate .8 In this case, the housing price corresponds to its

fundamental-based price-- i.e., Pt = Pt .
    The prediction that house prices are driven solely by economic fundamentals depends crucially on the

6 We implicitly use this demand equation for rental housing to relate house prices to personal disposable income. In doing

so, however, the de...nition of fundamentals has to be augmented with a particular speci...cation of the rental housing demand.

7 Log-linear approximations are also commonly used but may be less relevant with nonstationary data where sample means

do not converge to population constants (see, e.g., Campbell and Shiller (1989) and Chapter 7 in Campbell et al. (1997)).

Further discussion on these approximations can be found in Lee and Phillips (2011). In this paper, we work with levels. Using

logs does not alter qualitatively the results.

    8 For  the standard dividend discount model  in which the payo¤                       stream  fXt gt1=1   grow  s at a constant rate   see Gordon   and
Shapiro    (1956). Blanchard and Watson (1982)   and Campbell et al.                      (1997)  examine    more   general processes for  fXt gt1=1 .

                                                                                  4
transversality condition. In the absence of this condition, there exist in...nite forward solutions to the di¤er-

ence equation for the price of housing which are of the form (see, e.g., Sargent (1987); Diba and Grossman

(1988); LeRoy (2004))

                                      Pt = Pt + Bt;                        (8)

where Pt is the fundamental-based price of housing determined in (7) and Bt is a non-fundamental, bubble
term that satis...es the submartingale property

                                  Et (Bt+1) = (1 + )Bt:                    (9)

Since the discount factor is positive ( > 0), the bubble term Bt is on expectation explosive. Making the
discount factor t > 0 either stationary or integrated of order 1 is not going to alter the implications of the
submartingale in (9).

    A rational bubble occurs when expectations of future price increases rather than fundamentals drive
current house prices up (see, e.g., Case and Shiller (2003)). Hence, the emergence of such a bubble creates
exuberance in the housing market. Intuitively, in the presence of a bubble, buyers are willing to pay prices
increasingly higher than the fundamental-based price Pt because they expect to be compensated through
future price increases at a rate that equals the discount rate > 0.

    The fact that the bubble term is explosive has important implications for empirical studies. If economic
fundamentals follow either a stationary or an integrated process of order 1, which is a typical assumption
in the literature, then the only reason that house prices can display explosive dynamics is because rational
bubbles exist. Given that, one can test for rational bubbles by simply applying right-tailed unit root tests
to house prices in order to detect and date-stamp periods of (mildly) explosive behavior in the time series.
However, the results of such tests must be interpreted with caution since they are only indicative, not
conclusive. As we show next, factors other than bubbles can also give rise to explosive dynamics in house
prices.

Explosive Fundamentals. Following Campbell and Shiller (1987), we combine equations (7) and (8) to

obtain the following expression for house prices,

                                                   "  X1  1j   #

                       1          1+
                       Pt = Ft +      Et                       Ft+j + Bt;  (10)
                                                      j=1 1 +

where is the di¤erence operator. A plausible assumption is that the economic rents on housing, Ft, follow
a general autoregressive process of order 1,

                          Ft = Ft 1 + t; t W N 0; 2 ;                      (11)

where t is a white noise process. The stochastic process in (11) is stationary for j j < 1, integrated of order
one for = 1, and explosive for > 1. In the absence of bubbles (i.e., if Bt = 0 for all t), equation (8)

                                                      5
implies that the house price equates its fundamental-based price, so equations (10) (11) imply that9

                                 Pt = Pt = 1 (1                      1+          1
                                                                 )                  Ft:                           (12)
                                                                     1+

It follows from (12) that house prices Pt can display explosive dynamics, even if there is no bubble, due to
explosive dynamics in fundamentals-- i.e. > 1. In this case, exuberance in the housing market is inherited
from fundamental factors which might not be directly observable.

    It is worth noting that, irrespective of the value of , the ratio of house prices to fundamentals

                                         Pt = 1 (1 ) 1 +                      1                                   (13)

                                         Ft                      1+

is non-explosive in the absence of bubbles. On the contrary, in the presence of bubbles, house prices increase

in expectation faster than fundamentals causing their ratio to explode. This implies that right-tailed unit

root tests applied to price-to-fundamental ratios are more informative about rational bubbles than tests

applied to house prices alone. For this reason, we also examine the price-to-rent and the price-to-income

ratios in our empirical analysis.10

It should be noted that working with price-to-fundamental ratios does not make the results of right-

tailed unit root tests conclusive for the presence of a bubble. A reason for this is because we do not generally

observe  all  fundamentals,  so  rather  than  applying  our  tests  to  the  unobservable  price-to-fundamental  ratio  Pt
                                                                                                                         Ft

we rely on the observable price-to-rent        Pt  and price-to-income   Pt   ratios.11  Hence, even if there is evidence
                                               Xt                        Yt

of explosive behavior in such observable ratios, we cannot truly rule out the possibility that explosiveness

is inherited from the unobserved component of fundamentals Ut-- a de...ciency that plagues virtually all

empirical studies.

Time-varying Discount Rates. Another factor that can cause exuberance in the housing market is time
variation in the discount rate . Similarly to economic fundamentals, the trajectory of the discount rate can
have an important e¤ect on the characteristics of the fundamental-based price of housing. For simplicity, we
re-consider the asset pricing model of housing in (5) but with a time-varying discount rate, i.e.,

                                                   1      Et [Pt+1 + Ft+1] ;                                      (14)
                                             Pt = 1 +
                                                         t

and set = 1 so that the fundamentals process in (11) follows a random walk process, i.e.,

                                         Ft = Ft 1 + t; t W N 0; 2 :                                              (15)

    9 For a discussion of a more general solution with log-linear approximation methods see Engsted et al. (2012).
  10 The price-to-income ratio provides a metric of house prices relative to the ability of households to pay (see, e.g., Himmelberg

et al. (2005); Girouard et al. (2006)) and, thus, it incorporates one of the key determinants of the demand for housing.
  11 We note that, apart from income and rent, there are other fundamental drivers of housing prices, such as the cost of

foregone interest, the cost of property taxes and maintenance costs (see, e.g., the discussion in Himmelberg et al. (2005)). Lack

of consistent and comparable data across countries for fundamental factors like this remains a limitation for applied research

in housing.

                                                              6
We are interested in a scenario where there is a gradual and anticipated decline in interest rates over a
certain period of time. This change is described by12

                               8
                               <> 1 + 0, for 0 s k;

                      1+  t+s  = :>  (1 +   t+s+1) g, for       k+1  s < k0;                                       (16)
                                     1+    , for s k0;

where 0 < k < k0 < 1 de...nes the time window of decline for the discount rate, and g 1 determines the
gross rate of decline. This interest rate speci...cation collapses to the constant discount rate case whenever
g = 1, and implies 0 > whenever g > 1. The time-variation in (16) captures the idea that declining rates
may have been an important factor in the run-up of house prices leading to the 2008 09 global recession
(in line with Bernanke (2005)'s saving glut theory).

    Imposing the transversality condition to rule out non-fundamental bubbles, the unique solution to the
present value model for house prices is given by

                                        Pt = Pt = t 1Ft;                                                           (17)

where t 1 obeys the following di¤erence equation,

                               (1 + t) t 1 = (1 + t) :                                                             (18)

Combining the solution in (17) with the speci...cation of fundamentals in (15), we derive the following process

for the house price,

                      Pt = t 1 Pt 1 + "t; "t          WN        0;   2   2    :                                    (19)
                                                                     t1
                               t2

Equation (19) shows the potential impact of time variation in the discount rate on the persistence and
volatility of house prices.13

    In the constant discount rate case where g = 1, t = 1 and house prices inherit the unit root of
fundamentals. Furthermore, house price volatility is that of the fundamentals scaled by a constant related to

the discount rate. The solution in the general case where g > 1 can be characterized by backward induction
as follows: For s k0, the solution corresponds to the case where the low discount rate remains constant
with t+s = 1 . By taking t+k0 = 1 as given and using the speci...cation of the discount rate in (16) and the
di¤erence equation in (18), we can recover t+k0 1. In turn, we can similarly use t+k0 1 to back out t+k0 2
and so on until we recover the entire trajectory back to time t.14

Figure 1 illustrates the impact of time variation in the discount rate t given in (16) on the time series

12 The recursive representation of the discount rate is equivalent to the following alternative characterization,

                                     8  (1 +  ) gk0   k, for 0  s    k;
                                     <                               s < k0;
                                        (1 + ) gk0 s, for k + 1
                          1+   t+s = :  1 + , for s k0:

  13 For a discussion on the characteristics of the volatility process in house prices with data from the International House
Price Database see Mack and Martínez-García (2012). These authors provide empirical evidence of an increase in house price
volatility that is consistent with the stylized implications of declining discount rates laid out here.

  14 We can also show that the persistence term t 1 in the house price equation is bounded below by g and above by gk0 k
                                                                                                                 t2

over the period from t up to t + k0.

                                                   7
features of the house price series Pt in (19) with a simple numerical example.15 Our ...ndings suggest that
declines in interest rates can rationalize (at least qualitatively) run-ups in house prices, the explosiveness
in the time series and the increased volatility without having to appeal to non-fundamental explanations
(rational bubbles).

                                                        [INSERT FIGURE 1]

    In short, the above analysis highlights the importance of taking into consideration all three factors
(rational bubbles, time variation in the discount rate, and explosive fundamentals) when explaining changes
in the time series properties of house prices.

3 Testing for Episodes of Explosive Behavior

This sections describes the econometric methods that we employ to test for explosive behavior and provides
technical details for their estimation. The ...rst part of the section deals with univariate tests-- the supremum
ADF (SADF ) of Phillips et al. (2011) and the generalized SADF (GSADF ) of Phillips et al. (2012) and
Phillips et al. (2015)-- and the second part with our proposed extension to a multivariate setting.

3.1 The Univariate SADF and GSADF Procedures

Consider the following Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF ) regression equation

                   yt = ar1;r2 +   r1;r2 yt  1+  Xk            j          yt j + t;  t iid N (0;  2        );              (20)
                                                               r1 ;r2                             r1
                                                       j=1                                            ;r2

where yt  denotes  a generic time  series  (using the  notation    of     the  previous section, yt   can be   either Pt,  Pt  or
                                                                                                                           Xt

Pt  ),  yt j for j = 1; :::; k are the di¤erenced lags of the time series, and t is the error term. Moreover, r1
Yt

and r2 denote fractions of the total sample size that specify the starting and ending points of a subsample

period, k is the maximum number of lags included in the speci...cation, and ar1;r2 ,                  r1;r2 and  j         with
                                                                                                                 r1 ;r2

j = 1; :::; k are regression coe¢ cients.

    The emergence of explosive behavior in house prices de...nes a period of exuberance and is indicated by a

shift from a random walk-- under the assumption that fundamentals are I (1)-- to mildly explosive behavior.

Therefore, we are interested in testing the null hypothesis of a unit root in yt, H0 : r1;r2 = 0, against the
alternative of mildly explosive behavior, H1 : r1;r2 > 0. Let

                                             ADFrr12   =        br1 ;r2                                                    (21)
                                                            s.e. ( br1;r2 )

denote the test statistic corresponding to this null hypothesis. Setting r1 = 0 and r2 = 1 yields the standard
ADF test statistic, ADF01. The limit distribution of ADF01 is given by

                                                       R1   W  dW      ;                                                   (22)

                                                         0

                                                       R1   W  2  1
                                                                  2
                                                         0

15 For the numerical example, we set = 0:02, g = 1:0002774397, k0 k = 70, and 2 = 0:01.

                                                            8
where W is a Wiener process. The ADF test compares the ADF01 statistic with the right-tailed critical
value from its limit distribution. When the test statistic exceeds the corresponding critical value, the unit
root hypothesis is rejected in favor of the alternative of explosive behavior.

    Although widely employed, the standard ADF test has extremely low power in detecting episodes of
explosive behavior when these episodes end with a large drop in prices, i.e., in the presence of boom-bust
dynamics. For example, it is well established that nonlinear dynamics, such as those displayed by episodes
of explosiveness that are periodically collapsing, frequently lead to ...nding spurious stationarity even though
the process is inherently explosive (see, e.g., Evans (1991)).16

    In order to deal with the e¤ect of a collapse in house prices on the test's performance, Phillips et al.
(2011) proposed a recursive procedure based on the estimation of the ADF regression in (20) on subsamples
of the data. Normalizing the end of the original sample to T = 1, the authors propose estimating (20) using
a forward expanding sample with the end of the sample period r2 increasing from r0 (the minimum window
size for the ...xed initial window) to one (the last available observation). For this procedure, the beginning of
the sample is held constant at r1 = 0, and the expanding window size of the regression (over the normalized
sample) is denoted by rw = r2 r1. Then, while the starting point of the estimation is kept ...xed at r1 = 0,
the ADF regression is recursively estimated, while incrementing the window size, r2 2 [r0; 1], by adding one
additional observation at a time. Each estimation yields an ADF statistic denoted as ADF0r2 .

    The Phillips et al. (2011) test statistic, called sup ADF (SADF ), is de...ned as the supremum value of
the ADF0r2 sequence expressed as follows:

SADF (r0) = sup ADF0r2 :                                                                              (23)

                             r2 2[r0 ;1]

Under the null hypothesis of a random walk, the limit distribution of the SADF statistic is given by

  sup        RR0r0r22WWd2W12 :                                                                        (24)

r2 2[r0 ;1]

Similar to the standard ADF test, when the SADF statistic exceeds the right-tailed critical value from its

limit distribution, the unit root hypothesis is rejected in favor of explosive behavior.

    The SADF test performs well when there is a single boom-bust episode within the sample. Simula-

tion experiments in Homm and Breitung (2012) show that the SADF test outperforms alternative testing

methods-- such as the modi...ed versions proposed by Bhargava (1986), Busetti and Taylor (2004), and Kim

(2000) and Kim et al. (2002)-- in the presence of a single change in the persistence from a random walk to
an explosive process.17

    More recently, Phillips et al. (2015) derive a new unit root test, the Generalized SADF (GSADF ), that

covers a larger number of subsamples than the SADF by allowing both the ending point, r2, and the starting
point, r1, to change. This extra exibility on the estimation window results in substantial power gains in

  16 Evans (1991) show using simulation methods that standard unit root and cointegration tests cannot reject the null of no
explosive behavior, when such periodically collapsing episodes are present in the data. Price increases during the boom followed
by a decline during the correction phase make it look like a mean-reverting (stationary) process. Intuitively, this is the reason
why many non-recursive unit root tests wrongly suggest that processes that incorporate periodically collapsing boom-bust
episodes are stationary-- as indicated by Evans (1991).

  17 These approaches are used to test a permanent change in persistence from a random walk to an explosive process. As a
consequence, they perform well only in cases where the series becomes explosive but never bursts in-sample.

             9
comparison to the SADF . Furthermore, it makes the GSADF test consistent with multiple boom-bust
episodes within a given time series-- while the SADF test is consistent only with a single episode.

    The GSADF statistic is de...ned as

                             GSADF (r0) =                             sup              ADFrr12 :                             (25)
                                                                                                                             (26)
                                                         r22[r0;1];r12[0;r2 r0]

Under the null hypothesis, the limit distribution of the GSADF statistic is

                             8                                                                              9
                             ><>>                                                                           W (r1)] =>>>
                                       1  rw  [W  (r2)2  W (r1)2 rw]             R r2  W  (r)dr[W  (r2)              >;>> ;
         sup                           2
                                                                                   r1
r2 2[r0 ;1];r1 2[0;r2
                       r0 ]  >:>>                            R r2                hR r2             i2  1=2
                                                                                             (r)dr
                                                  rw1=2  rw    r1  W  (r)2dr         r1   W

where the window size of each estimation is rw = r2 r1. Again, rejection of the unit root hypothesis in
favor of explosive behavior requires that the test statistic exceeds the right-tailed critical value from its limit
distribution given by (26).

The Date-Stamping Strategy. If the null of a unit root in yt is rejected, then the SADF and GSADF
procedures can be used to obtain an exact chronology of exuberance in the housing market. The identi-
...cation of periods where house prices (or price-to-fundamental ratios) displayed mildly explosive behavior
is particularly important since it is a necessary condition for shedding light on the factors and develop-
ments that led to the 2008 09 global recession. We focus on the date-stamping strategy associated with
the GSADF procedure due to its good power properties and it's consistency in the presence of multiple
boom-bust episodes.

    Phillips et al. (2012) and Phillips et al. (2015) recommend a dating strategy under the GSADF approach
based on the backward sup ADF statistic, i.e.,18

                                          BSADFr2 (r0) =              sup ADFrr12 :                                          (27)

                                                                   r12[0;r2 r0]

The origination date of the period of exuberance is de...ned as the ...rst observation for which the BSADF

statistic exceeds its critical value,

                                                  n                                          o

                       rbe = inf                         r2 : BSADFr2 (r0) > scubr2T c ;                                     (28)

                                  r2 2[r0 ;1]

and the termination date as the ...rst observation after rbe for which the BSADF falls below its critical value,

                                                  n                                          o

                       rbf = inf                         r2 : BSADFr2 (r0) < scubr2T c ;                                     (29)

                                   r2 2[rbe ;1]

where scubr2T c is the 100 (1 ) % critical value of the sup ADF based on br2T c observations and is the
chosen signi...cance level. The consistency of the above dating strategy in the presence of one or two explosive

  18 The backward sup ADF (BSADF ) statistic relates to the GSADF statistic as follows,

                                                         GSADF (r0) = sup fBSADFr2 (r0)g :

                                                                                                             r2 2[r0 ;1]

                                                             10
periods that are periodically collapsing is established in Phillips et al. (2015).

Technical Details. The computation of the SADF , GSADF and BSADF test statistics necessitates
the selection of the minimum window size r0 and the autoregressive lag length k. Regarding the minimum
window size, this has to be large enough to allow initial estimation but it should not be too large to avoid
missing short episodes of exuberance. We follow Phillips et al. (2012) and set the minimum size equal to 36
observations. This minimum window size is also close to the size suggested by the rule of thumb of Phillips

                                       p
et al. (2015), r0 = 0:01 + 1:8= T .19

    With respect to the autoregressive lag length k, we evaluate our results primarily for two cases, k equal
to 1 and 4.20 Our ...ndings do not appear very sensitive to the lag length speci...cation and, for this reason,
we only report results for k = 4. More sophisticated lag length selection procedures based on information
criteria (such as the Modi...ed Information Criteria of Ng and Perron (2001)) and sequential hypothesis
testing (see, e.g., Ng and Perron (1995)) could, in principle, be applied but with a higher computational
cost. Moreover, Phillips et al. (2012) show that such procedures can result in severe size distortions, and a
reduction in power of both the SADF and GSADF tests. That is, they frequently lead to rejecting the null
hypothesis when in fact the time series follows a unit root process, and not rejecting the null when the time
series is explosive.

    The implementation of the unit root tests also requires the limit distributions of the SADF , GSADF
and BSADF test statistics. These distributions are non-standard and depend on the minimum window size.
Hence, critical values have to be obtained through Monte Carlo simulations. We obtain ...nite sample critical
values by generating 2000 replications of a driftless random walk process with N (0; 1) errors.21

    Finally, the researcher may choose to neglect very short periods of exuberance by setting a minimum
duration period. Phillips et al. (2015) recommend a minimum duration of log (T ) =T . Since all our house
price time series have 154 quarterly observations, the minimum duration that we adhere to in our empirical
evaluation corresponds to 5 quarters.

3.2 The Panel GSADF Procedure

The International House Price Database of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas has a large cross-sectional
dimension of 22 countries. The SADF and GSADF tests described in the previous sub-section, however, can
only be applied country by country and, hence, cannot exploit the panel nature of our dataset. To the best
of our knowledge, there is no sequential right-tailed unit root test for panel data in the literature. Inspired
by the work of Im et al. (2003), we propose an extension of the GSADF test procedure to heterogeneous
panels.22

    Consider the panel version of the ADF regression equation in (20),

yi;t = ai;r1;r2 +  i;r1;r2 yi;t  1+  Xk   j         yi;t j + i;t;                   (30)
                                          i;r1 ;r2
                                     j=1

  19 Exploring alternative minimum window sizes can be computationally demanding since for each r0 new critical values must
be computed.

  20 The choice of a ...xed lag length is appealing because it allows us to employ a recursive least squares approach which

substantially reduces the computational cost of estimation.
  21 Using asymptotic critical values doesn't qualitatively change our results. Asymptotic values are provided in Phillips et al.

(2015).
  22 We are grateful to an anonymous referee for motivating this extension.

                                 11
where i = 1; : : : ; N , denotes the country index, and the remaining variables are de...ned as in the previous
sub-section. We are interested in testing the null hypothesis of a unit root H0 : i;r1;r2 = 0 for all N
countries against the alternative of explosive behavior in a subset of countries, H1 : i;r1;r2 > 0 for some
i. This alternative allows for i;r1;r2 to di¤er across countries and, in that sense, is more general than
approaches based on the homogeneous alternative hypothesis.

    We propose a panel unit root test computed by taking the average of the individual BSADF statistics
at each time period. To facilitate the analysis, we adjust the notation for univariate test statistics to include
the country index i,

     ADFir;2r1                          =  s.e.  bi;r1 ;r2    )  ;  (31)
                                                  ( bi;r1;r2        (32)

     SADFi;0(r0) = sup ADFir;20;

                                      r2 2[r0 ;1]

and

     BSADFi;r2 (r0) =                            sup ADFir;2r1 :    (33)
                                                                    (34)
                                           r12[0;r2 r0]

The panel BSADF can now be de...ned as

                                     1 XN
     Panel BSADFr2 (r0) = N i=1BSADFi;r2 (r0):

The Panel BSADF statistic is particularly appealing because it measures the degree of overall exuberance
in international housing markets. Having de...ned the Panel BSADF , the de...nition of the Panel GSADF
follows naturally. It is simply the supremum of the Panel BSADF , i.e.,

     Panel GSADF (r0) = sup Panel BSADFr2 (r0):                     (35)

                                        r2 2[r0 ;1]

    The results of Maddala and Wu (1999) and Chang (2004) show that the distribution of panel unit root
tests based on mean unit root statistics is not invariant to cross-sectional dependence of the error terms i.
In light of the ample evidence of strong ...nancial linkages across countries (see, e.g., Lane and Milesi-Ferretti
(2003)), the assumption of uncorrelated shocks seems unrealistic even for international housing markets. In
order to draw inferences in this context, we adopt a sieve bootstrap approach that is designed speci...cally to
allow for cross-sectional error dependence. Details of the sieve bootstrap can be found in the Appendix.

    Dating episodes of exuberance in the global housing market can be performed by comparing the Panel
BSADF with the sequence of bootstrap critical values. The origination date is set equal to the ...rst
observation that the Panel BSADF statistic exceeds the 100 (1 ) % critical value obtained from the
bootstrap procedure, and the termination date is set equal to the ...rst observation that the Panel BSADF
falls below the 100 (1 ) % critical value.

4 Empirical Evidence on International House Prices

The sources and methodology used to construct the 22-country panel of house prices and personal disposable
income from the International House Price Database are documented in Mack and Martínez-García (2011).

                                        12
The data on real house prices and real personal disposable income per capita is reported quarterly, deated
with the PCE deator, and covers the period from the ...rst quarter of 1975 to the second quarter of 2013.
From this data, we construct an a¤ordability index for housing as the ratio (in percent) of real house prices
over real personal disposable income per capita for each country. For 16 out of the 22 countries that we
consider, a quarterly index of real housing rents is also available from the OECD (see Girouard et al. (2006)).
We use this rent index to construct the price-to-rent ratio for the 16 countries with available data.

                                                     [INSERT FIGURES 2 & 3]

    The sample period covered in our dataset includes several recessions, which makes it ideal for contrasting
the timeline of the boom and bust in international housing markets prior to the 2008 09 global recession
against the experience during previous periods of contraction in economic activity. The median, lower and
upper quartile of house prices of all 22 countries are displayed in Figure 2. We observe from the ...gure that
for the median country, real house prices troughed in the mid-1990s and peaked around 2006. Furthermore,
we can see that the run-up in real house prices during this period is widespread-- an observation that has
fueled the view that the latest boom-bust episode in housing had a part in the 2008 09 global recession.
This view is further supported by the fact that the time evolution of the ratios of house prices to their long-
run anchors (income and rents) display similar patterns (see Figure 3). This motivates our ...rst research
question of whether there is formal statistical evidence that substantiates the claim that housing markets
were exuberant prior to the global recession.

4.1 Empirical Findings: A Chronology of Exuberance in International Housing
       Markets

Table 1 reports results for the SADF and GSADF tests on real house prices, the price-to-income ratio and
the price-to-rent ratio. A comparison of the results of the two methods reveals large di¤erences. Starting
with the GSADF test, there is strong evidence of exuberance in real house prices with the null hypothesis
of a unit root being rejected for all countries but three: Finland, Italy and South Korea. The evidence in
favor of mildly explosive behavior remains strong when we look at the price-to-income ratio (the null cannot
be rejected only for Finland, Italy, South Korea and Norway) and the price-to-rent ratio (the null cannot
be rejected only for Germany, France and Italy). Turning to the SADF test, we observe that the number
of rejections of the unit root hypothesis is substantially smaller than that for the GSADF , which is in line
with the higher power of the latter. In particular, the SADF test cannot reject the null for more than half
of the countries of our sample (12 out of the 22) when we examine real house prices. When we look at the
price-to-income and price-to-rent ratios, the evidence in favor of exuberance becomes even weaker with fewer
rejections. Overall, these results indicate that episodes of explosive behavior were widespread across a large
number of countries and that powerful testing procedures are required to detect them.23

                                                         [INSERT TABLE 1]

  23 National house price indices aggregate across dwelling types and diverse locations within a country which may impact on
the performance of the econometric tests described in the previous section. In order to examine the e¤ect of aggregation on the
properties of the SADF and GSADF tests, we have conducted a large simulation experiment based on the S&P/Case-Shiller
10-City Composite Home Price Index and its constituent series. The results of the simulation experiment (which are available
upon request from the authors) illustrate that aggregating lowers the power of both the SADF and GSADF tests. The e¤ect is
much larger for the SADF test than for the GSADF test, which gives us another reason to prefer the latter in our econometric
strategy.

                                                                     13
    We now turn to the chronology of exuberance. Figure 4 and Figure 5 show the periods during which
the series under examination displayed explosive dynamics (i.e., the periods during which the estimated
BSADF statistics exceed the corresponding 95% critical values). Focusing on the results for real house
prices, three phases can be identi...ed in connection with the latest boom and bust episode in international
housing markets.

    In the ...rst phase, between the mid-1990s and the early 2000s, real house prices became explosive in the
U.S. and Ireland. There were also concurrent episodes detected for Norway and Switzerland at the time,
but those seemed to have evolved and eventually collapsed on their own.

    In the second phase of the boom period, i.e., by the early-to-mid 2000s, the number of countries with
explosive real house prices shot up to 18 (out of a total of 22). This near-simultaneous exuberance in house
prices is particularly interesting given the substantial di¤erences across domestic housing markets and the
non-tradability of housing. As evident from ...gures 4 and 5, this phenomenon has no precedent at least in
our sample period. A potential explanation for the ...rst two phases, is that the boom in house prices that
originated in the U.S. propagated to international housing markets with perceived greater opportunities or
lower risks. The pattern of propagation observed in the data and the high synchronization suggest that a
common factor may have contributed to house price exuberance spreading across countries. In this regard,
ripple e¤ects from the decline in world interest rates experienced during the 2000s and housing bubbles are
prime candidates (see, e.g., Case and Shiller (2003)).

    In the third and ...nal phase, the run-up in house prices started to be perceived as not sustainable, and
uncertainty about real economic activity in both the U.S. and around the world grew. The episode ended
with a collapse of house prices around 2006, making apparent the economic implications of the boom and
bust for the U.S. and the world.

    Looking at the results for price-to-fundamental ratios, we observe a similar pattern to real house prices.
Perhaps not surprisingly, however, the periods of explosive dynamics in the price-to-fundamental ratios
are somewhat shorter. For the U.S., in particular, we observe that the house-price-to-income ratio did
not become explosive until the early 2000s. The fact that U.S. real house prices were explosive in the late
1990s but the house-price-to-income ratio was not implies that explosiveness may have been driven in part by
economic fundamentals. This conclusion is in line with the strong growth (partly due to the new information
technologies) in U.S. income in the 1990s.

                                                     [INSERT FIGURES 4 & 5]

    There is an unusual synchronization in the episodes of explosive behavior across most of the countries in
the sample since the early-to-mid-2000s. This period of near simultaneous exuberance was pervasive across
very di¤erent housing markets whose fundamentals where not necessarily aligned, and it is unprecedented
given the sample period and country coverage in our dataset. An overall picture of the behavior of inter-
national housing markets is given by the results for the Panel GSADF test. The Panel GSADF statistics
are statistically signi...cant for both real house prices and price-to-fundamental ratios which provides strong
evidence in favor of global exuberance in our sample.

    What is more interesting is the time evolution of the three panel BSADF statistics displayed in Figure 6.
Irrespective of the variable under examination (real house prices, the price-to-income ratio and the price-to-
rent ratio), the results demonstrate in a clear manner the three phases of the housing market: the BSADF
statistics start below their critical values at the beginning of the sample, they increase rapidly after the

                                                                     14
mid-1990s and eventually exceed their critical values during the second phase starting in the early 2000s,
with the period of global exuberance in housing markets continuing until 2006 07 at which point it quickly
collapsed in all three statistics (near-)simultaneously.

                                                        [INSERT FIGURE 6]

The Cases of the U.S., the U.K. and Spain. Having established the emergence of global exuberance
in housing markets, we now return to the experiences of individual countries and, speci...cally, the U.S., the
U.K. and Spain. This choice is based on the economic size and signi...cance of these countries, and because
they exemplify the distinct patterns observed during the three main phases of the timeline of events that we
describe in our paper. As can be seen from Figures 7, 8 and 9, the real house price appreciation has been
very signi...cant for these three countries since the mid-1990s, with the run-up in the U.K. and Spain being
larger over time than that in the U.S. This sets Spain and the U.K. apart, but as our evidence shows, it does
not mean that explosive behavior is somehow a weaker phenomenon for the U.S.

                                                    [INSERT FIGURES 7 to 9]

    Figures 7 to 9 show the estimated BSADF statistics for the three countries together with 95% critical
values. Focusing on real house prices, we observe that during the period of global exuberance leading to the
2008 09 global recession, the U.S. played the leading role with the U.K. and Spain following.

    In spite of the di¤erences between the housing markets of Spain and the U.K., our ...ndings show that both
countries went through a near simultaneous period of exuberance during the second phase of the timeline--
although the U.K. also experienced an echo before the ...nal collapse ahead of the 2008 09 recession.
This pattern of strong synchronization in housing exuberance across countries is in line with the view that
exuberance in real house prices in the U.S. migrated and ampli...ed the e¤ect of domestic factors in these two
(otherwise very di¤erent and distant) housing markets.

4.2 The Predictive Ability of Macro and Financial Variables

Having established a timeline of exuberance in international housing markets, we employ a pooled probit

model to assess the in-sample predictive ability of macroeconomic and ...nancial variables. The probit model

is described by

                 P (EXUi;t = 1) = xi0;t ;                    (36)

where ( ) is the standard normal cumulative distribution function, xi;t is a vector of predictors for all
i = 1; :::; N , and EXUi;t is the dependent binary variable for all i = 1; :::; N that takes the value of 1 if there
is evidence of exuberance in country i and 0 otherwise, i.e.,24

                           (

                 EXUi;t =     0; if BSADFi;t (r0) < scut ;   (37)
                              1; if BSADFi;t (r0) > scut :

    Our choice of predictors is based partly on the theoretical model of house price determination discussed

in section 2-- particularly in regards to the role of time-variation in interest rates and related ...nancial

  24 The variability of EXUt within a country is limited because the GSADF methodology does not detect many episodes of
exuberance. An advantage of the pooled probit model is that, by incorporating the full variability across countries, it increases
the number of episodes leading to more tightly identi...ed results.

                              15
variables. We also include a number of macro factors which the existing literature has found to be relevant
for predicting booms and busts (or turning points of the housing cycle). A detailed description of the dataset
is provided by Grossman et al. (2014). This dataset is complemented with OECD and BIS data, also with
national and other sources, whenever necessary.

    Among the ...nancial predictors, we consider the spread between the long and short term interest rates.
The spread proxies the slope of the yield curve and indicates market expectations of future policy rates.
We also include long-term interest rates to proxy for mortgage rates and the e¤ect they may have on the
likelihood of a period of exuberance. Long-term rates also provide a ...nancial measure of the opportunity
costs of investing in housing.

    In addition, using OECD data, we consider quarter-over-quarter changes in stock markets in part because
we expect stock prices to be forward-looking and, therefore, to reect the pro...tability of alternative asset
classes. Furthermore, stock market appreciation is related to changes in households'...nancial wealth.

    We incorporate measures of domestic nominal credit growth to the private sector from the BIS in quarter-
over-quarter growth rates as well as the current account to GDP ratio and the quarter-over-quarter changes
in the current account. An expansion of private credit can lead to asset price and housing booms and capital
inows from abroad can fuel a rapid expansion of domestic credit. Hence, we aim to determine whether
periods of exuberance can be predicted not just from the extent of the preceding credit expansion, but also
from whether the funding arises externally.

    We also examine quarter-over-quarter changes in real personal disposable income per capita and, based
on OECD data, of real housing rents too. Housing rents proxy for time-variation in the expected returns
on housing-- the relationship between house prices and rents is at the core of our asset-pricing model of
housing determination. Regarding real personal disposable income, this variable is meant to capture key
demand-side fundamentals that are conventionally viewed as anchoring the housing market over the long
run.

    As indicators of the state of the business cycle, we use the unemployment rate from national sources,
real GDP growth (quarter-over-quarter) and CPI ination (quarter-over-quarter). These variables are not
generally viewed as leading indicators, but they can have predictive power on future consumption and
investment on housing. Moreover, we use the updated quarterly average of the global indicator of real
economic activity proposed by Kilian (2009) and oil prices on the West Texas Intermediate from the Wall
Street Journal to account for global economic developments.

    Due to the fact that we do not have data on rent and private credit growth for all countries, our
...nal dataset consists of a subset of 14 countries that have experienced at least one period of exuberance
in-sample and for which we have all available data: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Switzerland, Germany,
Denmark, Spain, Finland, France, the U.K., Ireland, Japan, Netherlands, and the U.S. To specify the pooled
probit model, we start with a general speci...cation including all our explanatory variables. This model is
sequentially reduced by deleting after each iteration the insigni...cant variable with the highest p-value until
all remaining variables appear statistically signi...cant.

                                                         [INSERT TABLE 2]

    The estimation results for the ...nal speci...cation of the pooled probit model with and without random
e¤ects can be found in Table 2. Overall, there is evidence that ...nancial and macro variables, at least in-
sample, have predictive power for exuberance. Our ...ndings suggest that the factors that matter for predicting

                                                                     16
an episode of exuberance are: First, mortgage costs and access to mortgage credit, which are proxied by long-
term rates and credit growth to the private sector. Foreign savings/disavings and the current account also
play a role. Second, demand-side factors of the housing market and, in particular, per capita real disposable
income growth and the unemployment rate. Third, domestic and global macroeconomic conditions, where
domestic conditions are proxied by domestic real GDP growth, while global economic conditions are proxied
with the index of global economic activity of Kilian (2009).

    These results support the important role of declining long-term interest rates in the synchronization
of domestic housing markets, in line with the predictions of our stylized asset-pricing model. Current
account changes also matter lending some empirical support to the view that international capital ows may
contribute to the propagation of exuberance across countries. Moreover, our evidence highlights that global
economic conditions contribute positively to the likelihood of exuberance-- a ...nding that seems to conform
with the anecdotal evidence that during the boom years prior to the 2008 09 global recession, international
investors-- reaping the bene...ts of strong global growth-- turned their attention increasingly towards housing
markets for investment, fueling housing price run-ups across many di¤erent countries.

    The last row of Table 2 also reports McFadden's pseudo R2 for the probit model with and without
random e¤ects. The estimates for the pseudo R2 are 0:230 and 0:252, respectively, which suggests that
although the macro and ...nancial variables examined have strong predictive content, there is ample room for
other explanatory factors. According to the theoretical analysis of section 2, unobserved fundamentals and
rational housing bubbles may well be such factors.

5 Concluding Remarks

In this paper, we employed two econometric procedures, namely the SADF and GSADF , developed recently
by Phillips et al. (2011) and Phillips et al. (2015) in order to examine whether house prices and price-to-
fundamental ratios exhibited explosive behavior during the last four decades and, if so, to identify the exact
periods of exuberance. An appealing feature of our study is the use of data from the International House
Price Database of the Federal Reserve Bank, which has a large cross-sectional dimension and, therefore,
allows a unique, international look at the behavior of housing markets.

    A consistent timeline of events emerges from our empirical evidence suggesting that the latest boom-
bust cycle in international housing markets was unusually widespread and evolved in three phases: One of
origination that can be related to the U.S. experience primarily during the second half of the 1990s; a second
phase of propagation that is characterized by widespread and synchronized episodes of exuberance across
very di¤erent housing markets during the ...rst half of the 2000s; and a ...nal phase where this episode of
global exuberance burst within a short period of time from the severe contraction in economic activity of
the 2008 09 global recession.

    In order to exploit the cross-sectional dimension of our dataset, we also propose an extension of the
GSADF test to a panel setting. This extension is appealing because it allows to draw general conclusions
about international housing markets. Moreover, it is straightforward to implement and, like the SADF and
GSADF , allows dating periods of exuberance. The results of the Panel GSADF test provide further support
to the view that exuberance in housing markets prior to the 2008 09 global recession was an international
phenomenon.

                                                                     17
    Finally, we examined whether macroeconomic and ...nancial variables impact the likelihood of exuberance
in housing markets. In particular, we employed a panel probit model with a large number of predictors that
have been suggested in the literature to be important determinants of housing cycles. Our results suggest
that long-run interest rates, credit growth, demand-side factors (such as per capita real disposable income
growth), as well as domestic and global macroeconomic conditions impact the likelihood of a housing market
being in a state of exuberance. These ...ndings provide (at least partially) an explanation for the widespread
exuberance detected in the early- and mid-2000s.

                                                                     18
                          Appendix

A Demand Equation for Rental Housing

Consider the maximization of the Stone-Geary utility function with housing units rented, Ht, and consump-
tion of other goods, Ct, i.e.,25

                                     U (Ht; Ct) = (Ht H ) (Ct C )1 ; 0 < < 1;

subject to the intratemporal budget constraint,

                          Ct + xtHt = Yt;

where the price of the consumption good is normalized to one. Xt xtHt is the housing rents-- rental
expenditures-- paid and xt the rental rate per unit rented, Yt refers to disposable income, and 0 < < 1,
 H and C are preference parameters.

    From ...rst-order conditions, the Stone-Geary utility function subject to the standard intratemporal budget
constraint gives a linear expenditure system where the demand for rental housing takes the following form:

                          Ht = H + xt (Yt xt H C ) ;      (38)

or in expenditure terms,

                          Xt xtHt = Yt + (1 ) H xt    C:  (39)

Under the assumption that in equilibrium the units rented are constant (i.e., Ht = H) and normalized to one,
the demand equation that determines housing rents in (39) reduces to an a¢ ne transformation of disposable

income Yt, i.e.,

                          Xt = xt = F + Yt+1;             (40)

where  1 (1 ) H and F     1 (1 ) H C .

  25 While the Stone-Geary reduces to the Cobb-Douglas utility function whenever the parameters H and C are both set equal
to zero, the speci...cation permits both the rental rate elasticity and the income elasticity to vary with both rental rates and
income-- unlike the Cobb-Douglas where both elasticities are constant or the constant elasticity of substitution utility function
for which the income elasticity is constant.

                                                                     19
B The Panel GSADF Test

The bootstrap procedure consists of the following steps:

1. For each country, impose the null hypothesis of a unit root and ...t the restricted ADF regression

equation,                                              Xk

                        yi;t = ai;r1;r2 +                  j=1    j           yi;t j + i;t;
                                                                  i;r1 ;r2

to obtain coe¢   cient  estimates (bai;r1;r2 , and  bj          for j = 1; : : : ; k) and residuals (bi).

                                                      i;r1 ;r2

2. Create a residual matrix with typical element bt;i.

3. In order to preserve the covariance structure of the error term, generate bootstrap residuals           b    by
                                                                                                           i;t

sampling with replacement raws from the residuals matrix.

4. Use the bootstrap residuals and the estimated coe¢ cients to generate recursively bootstrap samples

for ...rst di¤erences,                                 Xk

                        yib;t  =  bai;r1;r2         +        j=1  bj          yib;t j + bi;t;

                                                                    i;r1 ;r2

and for levels,                                        Xt

                                  yib;t             =        p=1  yib;p:

5. Compute the sequence of Panel BSADF statistics and the Panel GSADF statistic for yib;t.

6. Repeat steps (3) to (5) a large number of times to obtain the empirical distribution of the test statistics
   under the null of a unit root.

                                                       20
References

   Adams, Z. and R. Fuss (2010). Macroeconomic Determinants of International Housing Markets. Journal
       of Housing Economics 19, 38­50.

   Agnello, L. and L. Schuknecht (2011). Booms and Busts in Housing Markets: Determinants and Implica-
       tions. Journal of Housing Economics 20, 171­190.

   André, C., L. A. Gil-Alana, and R. Gupta (2014). Testing for Persistence in Housing Price-to-Income and
       Price-to-Rent Ratios in 16 OECD Countries. Applied Economics 46 (18), 2127­2138.

   Berkovec, J., Y. Chang, and D. A. McManus (2012). Alternative Lending Channels and the Crisis in U.S.
       Housing Markets. Real Estate Economics 40 (s1), S8­S31.

   Bernanke, B. S. (2005). The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account De...cit.
       At the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Virginia.
       http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2005/200503102/.

   Bhargava, A. (1986). On the Theory of Testing for Unit Roots in Observed Time Series. Review of
       Economic Studies 53, 369­384.

   Blanchard, O. and M. Watson (1982). Crisis in the Economics Financial Structure, Chapter Bubbles,
       Rational Expectations, and Financial Markets, pp. 295­315. Lexington Books, Lexington, Mass.

   Blanchard, O. J. (1979). Speculative Bubbles, Crashes and Rational Expectations. Economics Letters 3,
       387­389.

   Busetti, F. and A. Taylor (2004). Tests of Stationarity Against a Change in Persistence. Journal of
       Econometrics 123, 33­66.

   Campbell, J., A. Lo, and A. MacKinlay (1997). The Econometrics of Financial Markets. Princeton, NJ:
       Princeton University Press.

   Campbell, J. and R. Shiller (1987). Cointegration and Tests of Present Value Models. Journal of Political
       Economy 95, 1062­1088.

   Campbell, J. and R. Shiller (1989). The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future Dividends and
       Discount Factors. Review of Financial Studies 1, 195­228.

   Cappozza, D. R., P. H. Hendershott, and C. Mack (2004). An Anatomy of Price Dynamics in Illiquid
       Markets: Analysis and Evidence from Local Housing Markets. Real Estate Economics 32 (1), 1­32.

   Case, K. E. and R. J. Shiller (2003). Is There a Bubble in the Housing Market? Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity 34 (2), 299­362.

   Chang, Y. (2004). Bootstrap Unit Root Tests in Panels with Cross-sectional Dependency. Journal of
       Econometrics 120 (2), 263­293.

   Chen, S.-S. (2009). Predicting the Bear Stock Market: Macroeconomic Variables as Leading Indicators.
       Journal of Banking and Finance 33 (2), 211­223.

   Clayton, J. (1996). Rational Expectations, Market Fundamentals and Housing Price Volatility. Real Estate
       Economics 24, 441­470.

                                                                     21
Diba, B. and H. Grossman (1988). Explosive Rational Bubbles in Stock Prices. American Economic
    Review 78, 520­530.

Engsted, T., T. Pedersen, and C. Tanggaard (2012). The Log-Linear Return Approximation, Bubbles,
    and Predictability. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 47, 643­665.

Evans, G. W. (1991). Pitfalls in Testing for Explosive Bubbles in Asset Prices. American Economic
    Review 81 (4), 922­930.

Flood, R. and R. Hodrick (1990). On Testing for Speculative Bubbles. Journal of Economic Perspectives 4,
    85­101.

Girouard, N., M. Kennedy, P. van den Noord, and C. André (2006). Recent House Price Developments: The
    Role of Fundamentals. OECD Economics Department Working Papers No. 475 . OECD Publishing.

Gordon, M. and E. Shapiro (1956). Capital Equipment Analysis: The Required Rate of Pro...t. Management
    Science 3 (1), 102­110.

Grossman, V., A. Mack, and E. Martínez-García (2014). A New Database of Global Economic Indicators.
    The Journal of Economic and Social Measurement 39 (3), 163­197.

Hiebert, P. and M. Sydow (2011). What Drives Returns to Euro Area Housing? Evidence from a Dynamic
    Dividend-Discount Model. Journal of Urban Economics 70 (2-3), 88­98.

Himmelberg, C., C. Mayer, and T. Sinai (2005). Assessing High House Prices: Bubbles, Fundamentals
    and Misperceptions. Journal of Economic Perspectives 19 (4), 67­92.

Homm, U. and J. Breitung (2012). Testing for Speculative Bubbles in Stock Markets: A Comparison of
    Alternative Methods. Journal of Financial Econometrics 10 (1), 198­231. Winter.

Hott, C. and P. Monnin (2008). Fundamental Real Estate Prices: An Empirical Estimation with Interna-
    tional Data. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 36, 427­450.

Hwang, M. and J. M. Quigley (2006). Economic Fundamentals in Local Housing Markets: Evidence from
    U.S. Metropolitan Regions. Journal of Regional Science 46, 425­453.

Im, K. S., M. H. Pesaran, and Y. Shin (2003). Testing for Unit Roots in Heterogeneous Panels. Journal
    of Econometrics 115 (1), 53­74.

Kilian, L. (2009). Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply Shocks in the
    Crude Oil Market. American Economic Review 99 (3), 1053­1069.

Kim, J.-Y. (2000). Detection of Change in Persistence of a Linear Time Series. Journal of Econometrics 95,
    97­116.

Kim, J.-Y., J. Belaire-Franch, and R. Amador (2002). Corrigendum to `Detection of Change in Persistence
    of a Linear Time Series'. Journal of Econometrics 109, 389­392.

Lane, P. R. and G. Milesi-Ferretti (2003). International Financial Integration. Working paper 03/86, IMF.
Lee, J. H. and P. C. Phillips (2011). Asset Pricing with Financial Bubble Risk. Working Paper, Yale

    University .
LeRoy, S. (2004). Rational Exuberance. Journal of Economic Literature XLII, 783­804.

                                                                  22
LeRoy, S. and R. Porter (1981). The Present-Value Relation: Tests Based on Implied Variance Bounds.
    Econometrica 49, 555­577.

Mack, A. and E. Martínez-García (2011). A Cross-Country Quarterly Database of Real House Prices: A
    Methodological Note. Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper no. 99 . December,
    Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.

Mack, A. and E. Martínez-García (2012). Increased Real House Price Volatility Signaled Break from the
    Great Moderation. Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Economic Letter 7 (1).

Maddala, G. and S. Wu (1999). A Comparative Study of Unit Root Tests with Panel Data and a New
    Simple Test. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 61 (S1), 631­652.

Mayer, C. (2011). Housing Bubbles: A Survey. Annual Review of Economics 3, 559­577.
Mian, A. and A. Su... (2009). The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S.

    Mortgage Default Crisis. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4), 1449­1496.
Mikhed, V. and P. Zemcik (2009a). Do House Prices Reect Fundamentals? Aggregate and Panel Data

    Evidence. Journal of Housing Economics 18, 140­149.
Mikhed, V. and P. Zemcik (2009b). Testing for Bubbles in Housing Markets: A Panel Data Approach.

    Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 38, 366­386.
Ng, S. and P. Perron (1995). Unit Root Tests in ARMA Models with Data-Dependent Methods for the

    Selection of the Truncation Lag. Journal of the American Statistical Association 90, 268­281.
Ng, S. and P. Perron (2001). Lag Length Selection and the Construction of Unit Root Tests with Good

    Size and Power. Econometrica 69, 1519­1554.
Nyberg, H. (2013). Predicting Bear and Bull Stock Markets with Dynamic Binary Time Series Models.

    Journal of Banking and Finance 37 (9), 3351­3363.
Pavlov, A. and S. Wachter (2011). Subprime Lending and Real Estate Prices. Real Estate Economics 39 (1),

    1­17.
Phillips, P. C. and T. Magdalinos (2007a). Limit Theory for Moderate Deviations From a Unit Root.

    Journal of Econometrics 136, 115­130.
Phillips, P. C. and T. Magdalinos (2007b). The Re...nement of Econometric Estimation and Test Proce-

    dures: Finite Sample and Asymptotic Analysis, Chapter Limit Theory for Moderate Deviations from
    a Unit Root under Weak Dependence, pp. 123­162. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Phillips, P. C. and T. Magdalinos (2012). Mildly Explosive Autoregression under Weak and Strong De-
    pendence. Journal of Econometrics 169 (2), 179­187.
Phillips, P. C., S.-P. Shi, and J. Yu (2012). Testing for Multiple Bubbles. Cowles Foundation Discussion
    Papers 1843 . Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics, Yale University.
Phillips, P. C., S.-P. Shi, and J. Yu (2015). Testing for Multiple Bubbles: Historical Episodes of Exuberance
    and Collapse in the S&P 500. International Economic Review forthcoming.
Phillips, P. C., Y. Wu, and J. Yu (2011). Explosive Behavior in the 1990's Nasdaq: When Did Exuberance
    Escalate Asset Values? International Economic Review 52 (1), 201­226.

                                                                  23
Phillips, P. C. and J. Yu (2011). Dating the Timeline of Financial Bubbles During the Subprime Crisis.
    Quantitative Economics 2 (3), 455­491.

Rousová, L. and P. van den Noord (2011). Predicting Peaks and Troughs in Real House Prices. OECD
    Economics Department Working Papers No. 882.

Sargent, T. (1987). Macroeconomic Theory. Boston: Academic Press.
Shiller, R. J. (1981). Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justi...ed by Subsequent Changes in Dividends?

    American Economic Review 71, 421­436.
Shiller, R. J. (2015). Irrational Exuberance. Revised and Expanded Third Edition. Princeton University

    Press.
West, K. D. (1987). A Speci...cation Test for Speculative Bubbles. Quarterly Journal of Economics 102 (3),

    553­580.
Yiu, M. S., J. Yu, and L. Jin (2013). Detecting Bubbles in Hong Kong Residential Property Market.

    Journal of Asian Economics 28, 115­124.

                                                                  24
C Tables and Figures

               Table 1: Results for the Univariate SADF and GSADF Tests

Panel A: Test Statistics

               Real House Prices       Price-to-Income Ratio  Price-to-Rent Ratio

Country        SADF GSADF              SADF  GSADF            SADF GSADF

Australia      2:23        6:18        1:08  2:57             2:21       6:40

Belgium              0:97  2:98        0:25  2:92             0:03       3:41

Canada               0:32  3:76        1:13  2:16             0:11       3:78

Switzerland    1:64        2:3         1:20  2:08             0:47       1:90

Germany              0:59  2:10        0:57  2:55             0:51       0:85

Denmark        1:31        2:83        0:03  1:76             0:37       2:98

Spain                0:39  3:34        0:01  1:84             0:16       2:20

Finland              0:94        1:45  0:89  0:96             1:70       1:70

France         1:35        2:21        0:03  2:46             0:36       1:48

United Kingdom 1:83        3:34        1:50  2:65             0:26       3:02

Ireland        2:59        3:71        2:01  2:19             2:33       4:54

Italy                1:28        0:38  1:52  0:85             1:93       0:26

Japan          1:66        3:76        0:88  4:63             1:44       2:24

South Korea          1:11        0:32  0:49  0:49

Luxembourg     1:65        3:89        0:27  1:59

Netherlands          0:43  4:13        0:17  3:13             1:49       3:55

Norway               0:85  1:75        0:22  0:31

New Zealand    1:77        2:35        0:43  3:10             2:82       3:89

Sweden               0:18  3:79        0:23  3:34

United States  1:52        3:81        0:78  3:47             0:55       3:64

South Africa         0:92  3:93        1:35  3:44

Croatia              0:03  1:64        0:87  2:23

Panel B: Critical Values

90%            0:98        1:54        0:98  1:54             0:98       1:54

95%            1:25        1:80        1:25  1:80             1:25       1:80

99%            1:89        2:39        1:89  2:39             1:89       2:39

Note: *, ** and *** denote statistical signi...cance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent signi...cance level respectively. All results are for
autoregressive lag length k=4.

                                       25
Table 2: Estimation Results for the Pooled Probit Model

Long-term Interest Rates                           0:166     0:221
Private Credit Growth                              0:222     0:207
Current Account Growth (In Units)                             0:005
Real Per Capita Personal Disposable Income Growth    0:004   0:223
Unemployment Rate                                  0:209      0:130
Real GDP Growth                                     0:073    0:176
Global Economic Conditions                         0:169      0:014
Random-E¤ects                                      0:014
McFadden's R2                                                      Yes
                                                         No     0:252
                                                      0:230

Note: *, ** and *** denote statistical signi...cance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent signi...cance level, respectively. We ...t a probit
model with constant term (...rst column) and a random-e¤ects probit model (second column). The balanced panel includes 14
countries with at least one period of exuberance in-sample and complete data from the ...rst quarter of 1975 to the second
quarter of 2013 on interest rate spreads, long-term rates, changes in stock market valuations, private credit growth, the
current account over GDP ratio, growth in the current account, growth in real per capita disposable income, growth in real
rents, the unemployment rate, real GDP growth, headline CPI ination, changes in the West Texas Intermediate index of oil
prices, and the updated measure of global economic conditions of Kilian (2009). We only report the results of a parsimonious
speci...cation of each model after recursively eliminating the non-statistically signi...cant variables with the highest p-values.
Hence, the speci...cation reported in the table only includes long-term rates, private credit growth, current account growth,
real per capita personal disposable income growth, the unemployment rate, real GDP growth, and Kilian (2009)'s global
conditions measure. Standard errors are adjusted for country-clusters.

26
Figure 1: Real House Prices: The Dynamic E¤ects of an Anticipated Decline in the Discount Rate
                                                               27
                   Figure 2: Real House Prices: Cross-Country Characteristics
Figure 3: Price-to-Income Ratio and Price-to-Rent Ratio: Cross-Country Characteristics

                                                         28
Figure 4: Date-Stamping with Real House Prices and the Price-to-Income Ratios
 Figure 5: Date-Stamping with Real House Prices and the Price-to-Rent Ratios
                                                    29
Figure 6: Date-Stamping Global Periods of Exuberance
                                   30
Figure 7: Date-Stamping with U.S. Real House Prices
                                  31
Figure 8: Date-Stamping with U.K. Real House Prices
                                  32
Figure 9: Date-Stamping with Spain Real House Prices
                                   33
